.(b) Since the deterrent capability of U.S. long and medium range missile

                        present to clean a dirty weapon reduces its yield by some  it

                        that the attainment of a Ballistic Missile warhead greater than 

 Mr.McConeexpressed irritation with

                        radioactivity equivalent to a fission component of approximately 

                        possible. 

                        retaliatory attack on the Soviet Union, the U.S. had as targets . In view of

                        remember well when the military used to have no more than .He accordingly

                        talk with the President about intelligence satellites. Because

                        execution of his plans.(6) (7) That this program be closely integrated with the weather services that

                        processing and evaluation that was used in the handling  films. Our

                        chancy at the outset. Now, however, we know that we can get a 

                        in the immediate future is to get a missile with a 1500 mile range, . Mr.Holadayin general confirmed

 was

                        force probes in which Communist support is not clear.  He thinks most local

                        Offshore Islands. However,

                        some kind should be initiated to provide information on whether or not . If such a

not declassified]. Mr.Dillonfelt that it should be very clear that . If we

                        risk. Mr.Graysaid the Record of Actions

                        use of .7. Anticipation of the need to initiate a limited military operation along

source text not declassified] warhead which would produce a 

                        might be disappointing in that it carried only a small warhead .

lines of source text not declassified]30. To impair and weaken Soviet domination, exploit divisive forces by

within the regime leadership.b. c. d. Publicizing evidences of unequal treatment by theUSSR.e. Encouraging comparisons of the lot of the dominated nations with that

nations, except that:a. b. Avoid publicity concerning defectors, escapees and refugees unless

be goaded .GOThas been given assurances on their

benevolent eye.GeneralCutlerthen went on to

    

cohesiveness of the Soviet bloc.4. 5. Soviet Policy. Present Soviet policy appears to be one of

within the regime leadership.b. c. d. Publicizing evidences of unequal treatment by theUSSR.e. Encouraging comparisons of the lot of the dominated nations with that

of an integrated, prosperous, and stable European community.Assigned to: State28. Assigned to: Defense29. To the extent possible, provide appropriate informational and public

    (Bundy)1Washington,.SUBJECTVietnamI attach an analysis of the Buddhist crisis in South Vietnam2by . While I don't believe it

them.Meanwhile latest reports from Buddhist contacts are ominous . There are

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. 1. Colonel

afternoon develops favorably, however, soundings will be made.Since above drafted have receivedCASreport 

     on these

of 116,000 

if Viet-Nam is to succeed against the Communists. (FYIDept has just received . EndFYI.Other steps to win back the Buddhists should be considered and

16 agreement and asking that it be revoked, at least in part .2. Article inTimes of Vietnamyesterday reporting

MadameNhu. I repeated what I had

of third-country nationals already being used in South Vietnam . Comment on major

is characteristic of theNgo Dinhs that they

asked Lyall Breckon to travel to the delta withWarrenif he would like to do it.I had a fine skiing vacation.I hope to see you soon and I hope that you will let me know if there is

outlined in letter.It continues our strong conviction (with which Colonel An  agree)ICCinvestigation would be

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. Embassy

Generals.4. Conein and 

Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1Washington,.SUBJECTCurrent Status of the War in South Vietnam1. Though the South Vietnamese government probably is holding its own

peak strength of 100,000 by July 1964, .

talk withNhu(see attached ).2SecretaryRuskcommented thatLodgehasn't come to grips

Operation Switchback (the transfer of paramilitary training  to Army

groups  to the

    not declassified].I am not sure that the policy of no contact with lower level State

paramilitary training  to the Army

    KhanhCommanding General II Corps, TDCSDB-3/655,512 , and the other

member of a coup group, TDCS-3/552,8227 comprising

in .4FYIState to Saigon 243 was prepared

Counselor (Ngo Dinh Nhu)1Saigon,.1.Ngo Dinh Nhubegan  by stating

    Nhusaid that he wanted to

Vietnamese authorities.9.  He

senior for the responsibility he now holds. Nevertheless, he gave  no real

for certain Montagnard training programs toDODwe do not lose the long-term assets . In particular, the members

perhaps 

situation, .All of this would take a great deal of doing. However, I believe that the

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. Situation here

declassified] It is obviously

Cutting them would have the same effect onGVNforeign exchange reserves as cutting(c)  Support for

Conein and 

period of breakdown of the central government mechanism. ()22. On August 27 Conein assured GeneralKhiemthat the US would do all in its power to assist

of US intentions, since the plan was provided for thepurpose of attack onColonel Tung's camp. ()44. On August 29Rufus Phillipsassured GeneralKim, on authority

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. Subject:Rufus Phillipsconversations

him of meeting withHarkins.b. He had definite information thatNhuwas aware Generals actively planning coup.c. Had received information that Americans other than Conein and  had contacted

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. Following

channel betweenNgo Dinh NhuandPham Van Dong.1.  surprised

French channels (notLalouettepersonally) was foregone conclusion.2.  had no hard

    than 1 line not declassified] also convey this word toNhu. Both  declined serve as

anti-American.4. Both  said

wife would like take trip toCONUSright now.  especially seemed anxious

with some specific message he wants convey, but neither  willing take

asked.5.  then said

ease off operations while negotiating more permanent settlement.6.  said he

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. 1. Following

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. Damage

    Thuan.2. GeneralStilwelland the  met Thuan at

You've come to talk about the special forces. Gen.Stilwelland the  acknowledged that this was

Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)1Washington,. 1. Saigon

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1Saigon,MAC 1993. Have just seenCASSaigon 2Copy received after dispatch. Apparently there

conversations toMinhand toMinhonly. Khiempleased there no leaks so

be implemented should become evident in very near future ( commented thatJCScould well start with inquiry asTung's disposal of funds

never considered any betrayal of Generals toDiem, and our 3explicitly rejected

prospects and are sending this before reply to our .4We want continuous

him and  in

conducted in immediate consultation with Harkins and  so that all three know what

thoughts on this Vietnamese initiation .5Please note thatCASSaigon 6correctsCASSaigon 20237and two regiments of

place in any case not later than 2 November. It might be notedDonalso is supposed to have said 6that though the coup committee

because I had not seenCASSaigon 8before dispatch

conversations with Consul,MAAG,USOM,USIS,  officials:Army presents mixed picture. Top commanders are loyal-not too

missed  but

    Friday2between  andNhu.1.  stressed

back, apparently, to negotiate with him about his resignation.  said that

10 and rebuild pagodas.Comment: Believe it was good tactics for  to seeNhuwithout me, as they

 on moments notice that Khiem has

interview. 

Pass eyes only SecretaryMcNamaraandMcCone.CINCPACexclusive for AdmiralFelt.1. As follow-up to approach reported inEmbtel731,2Richard Stilwelland  met Col.Le Quang Tung, Chief of

    line not declassified] from the beginning.4.  repeated

    , he would dissolve

by insisting that the civilian Ranger companies as well as theARVNRanger companies are underJGScontrol.5. After some further discussion,Tungwas reminded that Gen.Stilwelland the  were under the instructions

of the mountain scout and border surveillance units has passed  toMACV. Gen.Stilwellindicated that henceforth, payments would be

Hai, , Nguyen

    , Bui Van

     as

Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1Washington,Eyes only for AmbassadorLodgefromMcGeorge Bundy.1. Your 2023, ,

assessments ofHarkinsand .8. If coup should start, question of protecting U.S. nationals at once

play an important role in the protection of Americans in Viet-Nam.(c) Acting Chief ofCASStation  is already

completely.)I was also informed  that the Special

known, are also considered loyal with one exception.The armed forces in these four provinces presented a mixed picture.  appears by his

the  but found he was absent. Reports

something better. If they get something better, I can then go back.5. If  produce

in ,6if true, regarding the departure

either with 

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. Ref:CASWash 65032.21. During 30 AugCASsought meeting with

    Agencyto theStation in Saigon1Washington,.65032. Reference:CASSaigon .21.HQShighly concerned by implications

State although the family has successfully disguised this fact.  will send us a

Through the 

of . It is too

leave the country . They

done and 4reflects result of that decision. I

     that

and policies of a new govt than with personalities.  remarked that structure,

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,.IN 16397. 1. Herewith brief personal comments on recent developments .2. Buddhist crisis. BelieveGVNobviously

image with respect to Buddhists.3.  senior

adequate assurances by appropriate U.S. officials. Looking back,  general

field operations. (This applies toMAP support for certain airborne ranger,

    19864and 4that there was a lack of common understanding of the Washington coup

1896 and 5which quoted you on a sensitive subject were transmitted first and shown

about an American  who had talked to

operation; we also assume your concurrence in conclusion of ,3which we share, that if this

    Nhu's departure can only be worked out directly throughNhu.b. Meeting to be held withNhu. Aim at this

Am advised 

    .5ThusNhu[in?] Dalat could still be power

29 August, 

     rep

reversible, unless our conditions were met and maintained.The recommended transfer  toMACVof border surveillance and mountain

certain  activities: combat

    AgencyStation in Saigon to theAgency1Saigon,. 1. Lt. Col.

    of State1Saigon,2129. Ref:CASWashington .21. Following comments keyed to units named in ref:2. President Guard: Concur. Guard has estimated strength of 18 M-24

                        reportedly actively seeking neutralist support for the proposal. 

                        cooperative agreement between the Academy of Sciences andNASA. The characteristics of the system  appear to be

                        gradually be accepted.

                        ChiComs including denial of the use of foreign bottoms.b. Direct actions could include the following:(1) (2) (3) Conduct increasingly severe maritime control measures up to and including

                        threats  as

                        test ban considerations.3.  Most of

                        early 1963-1964.e.  The US

                        Weapons Development (p. 4-5) five areas are listed: (1)large yield clean weapons; (2)  (3)

                        should be noted that military requirements do not now exist for . If

                        instrumented underground experiments such as the proposed . Nevertheless,

                        to the Soviet Union, by their own admission, since 1952.  Inherent in the

                        neutronsis that the only scarce nuclear component required is tritium .b. The major characteristic of the neutron bomb is the extent and range of

                        seismic signal of less than 4.75.c. Further research and development on the pure fusion weapon,  or

                        shots of small yield devices and possibly including barges.  We have

                        develop an improved family of low-yield thermonuclear devices . This

                        like . In any case, we

 Thus

                        knowledge, it is now concluded that the Soviets are probably .3The

                        declassified] Its effects

                        development affords the prospect of strategic missile warheads in  (i)

of source text not declassified]. Advances in the 

                        Soviet clandestine testing. The

Undertaken Within the Next Year1. 2. [less than 1 line of source text not

                        preparation. Thus our worries will grow with time.DOD's strong argument that advanced versions of present weapons 

 could be

                        atmospheric and underwater tests: Seven shots ranging from  at

declassified] for studying electromagnetic pulse effects; and 

                        critical for the U.S.:1. Pure fusion weapons.

                        to the whole spectrum of offensive and defensive warfare. 2. Weight-yield ratio.Testing would result in a spectrum of reduced size and weight weapons,

                        the Soviets deploy anAICBMsystem.  important to

                        designed to produce a minimum of radioactive contamination. 

                        high altitude or in outer space. They are most important  and also to obtain

                        the two programs can also be carried out. No

                        devoted to securing a higher yield-to-weight ratio in weapons producing KT. The remaining seven shots would

                        Communist China.b. Stage I reduction of nuclear weapons.(1) The United States should be prepared to agree to transfer  of

                         as an attempt to probe

.TheAEC, in conjunction with the DOD, will

                        weights presently required to give these yields by a factor of .

                        by warhead development in this weight class. can

                        precludes them from being done underground in the next few years.7. 

                        at these weights. Alternatively they can be viewed as about 

                        declassified].9. A number of tests have been suggested which have yields of less than .

                        experiments. I also advocate the exclusion of the suggested experiment 

                        series now proposed would have a total yield of approximately 

line of source text not declassified] to about  and in altitudes

                        vulnerability. Advances range all the way from exploring changes in 

                        ratio .

                        developed and on the pace and progress of the developments programs.  the first



                        critical subject.

declassified]. We previouslyhad not suspected Yoshkar-Ola or Kostroma. 21. 

                        cancelled. 

                        within the next year, which we believe would be detected .Medium and Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles28. 

                        belt stretching from the Baltic to the southern Ukraine.  we are virtually



                        ambiguous. Construction has probably been completed at some sites  the

                        little in terms of extra target destruction.Moreover, the theatre forces were not included in these calculations, throughSIOP465:3 '62 includes about 

                        exception of the defense suppression targets, no targets  were included.

                        Force, would degrade our capabilities significantly for about  at

                        recalled.b. 

                        force U.S. to move from the local military action to the general war level.SIOP-62 execution of Alert Force .

of source text not declassified] they will respond in kind. c. Two recommendations follow:(1)CINCSACshould look at the false

of source text not declassified].3. An Alternative toSIOP-62. a. Reliability of present missiles is low, their accuracy uncertain, and

                        becomes more attractive. Further, if 26 of essential targets are 

                        one another), then to carry out this plan the U.S. must only get 

declassified]DGZ's-)

line of source text declassified] aircraft, instead of ,

                        command in a sensible way.4. An Appreciation ofSIOP-62. TheSIOP-62 target list is constant, with DGZ's, of which the Alert Force hits

                        requirement that U.S. forces should have the capability to achieve . To achieve

                        in parentheses.RECOMMENDED AND SERVICE-PROPOSED FORCESaEnd-Fiscal Year19611962196319641965196619671968BombersB-52555615630630630630630630B/E-47900810585450225B-584080808080807266RS-700(25)Total Bombers1495150512951160935710702696(721)Air Launched MissilesHound Dog216460580580580580580580(540)(432)(408)(408)Skybolt0000(184)(552)(1012)(1012)Total GAM's216460580580580580580580(724)(984)(1420)(1420)Surface-to-Surface MissilesAtlas287712612612612011199Titan4477108108108108108Minuteman150600800800800800(900)(900)(850)(750)Improved Minutemanb1150350500(300)(800)(1200)Polaris A-1-2-380144192288464560656656(640)(448)Polaris A3A00(16)(208)Total Missiles10826554511221498173820252163(1598)(1988)(2525)(2812)OtherQuail224392392392392392392392KC-135c400440500580620620620620KC-97600580340240120RC-13523232323RB-479045454515Thord6060606060606060Jupitere4545454545454545Regulus171717175Alert Force WeaponsWeapons10741512236426813053320934553568(3254)(3744)(4544)(5227)b Includes 100 Improved Minutemen programmed byFY1968 in place of the Skybolt missiles.c Includes National Emergency Airborne Command Post and Post-Attack Command

                        sophistication in weapon design.a. 

                        offensive missiles. The preliminary analysis indicates that,  significant

                        search has failed to identify even probable operationalICBMsite-complexes.c. d. It has been characteristic of other Soviet missile programs that prototype

                        sharply ,

                        personnel, or both.f. ,

declassified]g. 78. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army,

text not declassified] range, but a number of  missiles and

                        EndFY)1961*196219631964B-47300240225150B-5812242424B-52 (w/o GAM-77)120856565B-52 (+ GAM-77)65125145145Atlas()(39)(99)(99)Titan()(45)(81)(126)Minuteman()()(130)(540)TotalICBM's84310765Polaris326496128* These forces are loaded with nuclear weapons with a total yield of approximately .Since most of these weapons are in bombers on ground alert, their retaliatory capability is highly vulnerable to missile attack until our warning and control systems are much improved. But if no bombers are destroyed on the ground, weapons with a total yield of  are expected to reach bomb release line.Table 4U.S. Alert Forces as Proposed(Alert Bombers, Hardened or MobileICBM's, Polaris on Station, EndFY)1961196219631964B-4730029218090B-5812242424B-52 (w/o GAM-77)1801289898B-52 (+GAM-77)98187217217Atlas()(39)(99)(99)Titan()(45)(81)(126)Minuteman()()(130)(540)TotalICBM's84310765Polaris326496192Annex B7U.S. vs. SOVIET MISSILE STRENGTHU.S.a(Atlas, Titan, Minuteman)Mid-1960Mid-1961Mid-1962Mid-1963Production195287534858Operational Inventory1445155390In-Commission1241142369OperationalICBMLaunchers336117340U.S. (Polaris)Production of Missiles44197310502Number of submarines in Operation15*9*11Number of missiles in submarines in Operation80*144*176Number of submarines on Station246Number of Missiles on Station326496U.S. (Total OperationalICBMLaunchers or Polaris on Station)368181436SovietProg. A-Production100280460640Operational Inventoryb50190320460In-Commission30-40130-160250-280390-410OperationalICBMLaunchersc30150270400B-Production1204107701,130Operational Inventory60260530800In-Commission35-50180-220410-470680-720OperationalICBMLaunchers35200450700C-Production70170270370Operational Inventory1590165240In-Commission9-1260-75125-145200-215OperationalICBMLaunchersA few50125200The Soviet Union is estimated to have a force of submarine-launched missiles

                        well as other facets of atomic weapons command control. In the discussion on guerrilla and counter-guerrilla warfare, the President

                        improved second generation missiles armed with higher yield warheads 

                        with short range (350 n.m.) missiles capable of delivering warheads .

                        all-out  Soviet

                        and a seven division Soviet combined arms Army in 1967:SituationNATO EmploysSoviet EmploysResultsTaking a different, more theoretical approach17to over-allNATOground

                        latter.Note: This table is subject to the qualifications which follow:Though the method employed does take into accountNATOweapon losses due to enemy ground action, it does not

                        might be modified as follows:In April 1963, the JCS published the results of further investigations into

declassified][1 paragraph (10 lines of source text) not

                        million will be funded inFY1965.2. Retrofit of  of the

                        aggression.b. 9. It is our view that the strategic force structure set forth in your draft

                        recommended force of 

                        force level of  basic and

                        provides  percent greater

                        following page.SOVIET BLOC TARGETS END-FY1969[Heading and 4 paragraphs (17 lines of source text) not

                        shown below.Forces Required for Assured DestructionReturning now to the broad strategic objectives mentioned earlier, I would

                        weapons and  on about

                        uncertain, the most likely factors imply that such an attack .10On this

                        with the inclusion of the already programmed force of  Minuteman

                        to the extent that the prospect 

                        nuclear war.Because of the concentration of Communist China's industry, 

declassified] Minuteman missiles can destroy about . My

                         is shown below for three

declassified] Minutemen by endFY1969, and Force III is Secretary Zuckert's proposal including 

                        also shown in which . This case will

                        measured in the reduction in fatalities) of second-strike  attacks when

                        posture including 

text not declassified] Minutemen. Force IV includes the 

                        even more unfavorable.What this and other analyses suggest quite clearly about the 

in anti-missile defenses, not moreICBM's; and second, that the attempt to achieve a 

                        nuclear attacks, forcing the Soviets to devote resources to  and

                        the available evidence. For example, we have so far achieved about a 

                         or less, is conceivable.

                        Soviet offensive forces larger or more effective than anticipated, .Second, the Soviets may prove to have larger and more effective strategic

                        we may be slow in responding. We should consider the possibility of .Another possibility is that, for one of several reasons, we might be unable

                        there are many indications that it is high. For example, we maintain .[1 paragraph (13 lines of source text) not

                        the fact that the recommended U.S. force provides us with between a 

                        operation. If they have to take seriously the possibility that 

ensue in attempting to hold this area against the Soviets.  Mr.

increase the pressures on Iran to accommodate to the Soviets.  As

    

even more sensitive in the particular area of commercial policy. 1The Japanese Embassy here has

other means of achieving justice for Greek Cypriot cause.

been previously reported, I do not repeat it here.2.  I told Prime

of many Greeks, obviously guaranteed independence is fantasy.9. 

exist any potential basis for direct Greek-Turk negotiation. While situation looks extremely discouraging, it is obviously of utmost

Cyprus  where he will be exposed

of his health. In addition,Johnstonremarked that he had been informed 

taking Admiral Rickover along.3 The Vice

                        want to get out of Cuba can do so on an American visa.19. 20. It was stated that the troubles in Iran, whatever they may turn out to

                         to join a cadre of 32 Cuban

                        are currently selected targets:Matahambre Mine-Santa LuciaTexaco Refinery-SantiagoShell/Esso Refinery-HabanaRegla Steam Electric Plant-HabanaMatanzas Steam Electric Plant-MantanzasMoa Bay Nickel PlantPaper MillCardenasMicro Wave TowersEach operation entails risk, not only physical risk for the saboteurs, but

                        sugar, tobacco, tropicals, and coffee. Activities would include ,

text not declassified]Activity: 39. MaintainPAAservice between the U.S. and Cuba. (State, withCIAsupport)Purpose:  to

                        students, farmers.b. c. Provoke incidents between Cubans and Bloc personnel to exacerbate

                        briefing the appropriate Members of Congress.2. 3. In the second meeting Mr.McConereported GeneralEisenhower's views

                        response.4. 5. The Attorney General and Mr.McConehad a private conversation with the President for ten

                        operations. The Director concurred.11. In connection with the article appearing in theWashingtonPost of 14 December 1961 regarding Operation ,

declassified] mentioned that he had a private meeting with  had

                        Messrs.Barnes, , Captain Spore,

                        Avon-Park for the training of Cuban refugees in guerrilla warfare.g. h. Detail of an Officer toCIA.DODdetailed an officer to duty withCIA[1 line of source text

                        general war and without serious offense to public opinion.p. q. Air Re-supply. Four aircraft and crews have been readied for air re-supply

                        air re-supply missions over Cuba.s. t. Military Intelligence. A detailed list of Essential Elements of

                        installations and the principal centers of population of Cuba within  and

                        made with reaction times approximately as follows:2 Airborne Divisions5 days (para-drop units only)4 MarineBLTs7-8 daysFollowing Forces15-18 days(This operation would involve a dangerous element of risk.)c. d. Air strikes could be conducted against selected targets in Cuba within 6,

BarnesA/DDP/ACol.J. C. KingC/WHDAC/WH/4Mr. G. DrollerC/WH/4 [less

                        underground types. He said he had read the papers1prepared by Messrs.  and

                        up another headquarters of agency in Miami was not practical. Mr.Bissellcommissioned ,

                        his approval.5. 

                        11:30 a.m., there was a preliminary meeting held in the office of Mr.Goodwinwith him, Mr.Woodward, Mr. Wollam, and  to

                        however, his opening minutes were devoted to the air strike, the 

                        had been made.14. When questioned as to the failure of the preceding night on the 

                        this request, the requirement has been divided into its separate parts.2. Requirements (personnel, units and equipment).a.b.c. Major units involved in the initial assault include: Two Army airborne

                        transport squadrons.d. Principal equipment includes:(1) ArmyArtillery units and armor (including about 275 tanks)(2) Marines(3) Navy(4) Air Force3. Level of National Mobilization Required.a. ArmyNone. In lieu of mobilizing Civil Affairs units from the active

                        anticipates achieving control of key strategic areas in Cuba withindays. Subsequent to gaining such control of the island there will be a

                        Cuban government increases in effectiveness.b.It is

declassified]of the operation.c.d. For approximately ten days,CONUSMATSairlift would be fully committed.e.CONADair defense capabilities in

                        countries.Why is this not proposed as desirable and do-able?b. Item III B 3 on page 2: You note an economic blow by causing the diversion

                        enemy tank, armor, artillery, and anti-air capability.(a)(b)[1 paragraph (7-1/2 lines of source text) not

                        and objectives. e. United States Information Agency Operations.(1) The Agency will provide complete, but strictly factual and impartial

byCIA1TIME AND PLACE1400-1800 hours, 22 April 1961, Quarters EyePARTICIPANTSStudy Group MembersGeneralMaxwell D. TaylorAttorney GeneralRobert KennedyAdmiralArleigh BurkeAllen W. DullesDepartment of DefenseMajor GeneralDavid W. GrayColonel C. W. ShulerCommander MitchellCIAPersonnelGeneralC.P. CabellC. Tracy BarnesColonelJ.C. KingJacob D. EsterlineColonel Jack Hawkins1. After discussion of procedural matters, it was decided that all papers and

                        by theCIAChief of Station in Havana,  and

                        primary target of the advance guard was the Communist files in BRAC.5. 

                        of 

                        decided should be done. It was stated that it might be more difficult . The

                        church, farm cooperatives, youth groups, et cetera.(2)(3) The instantaneous commitment of sufficient armed forces to occupy the

                        1961:1. [1 paragraph (2-1/2 lines of source text) not

                        declassified]3. [1 paragraph (4-1/2 lines of source text) not

                        of 

                        that date. 

                        shall also have begun the search for suitable intermediaries. 6. Task 6, p. 5. By the assigned date we shall complete and submit a

                        jurists, and other professional classes. International contacts  will also be

                        General. Others present were:Brig. GeneralE.G. Lansdale(OSD)Major James Patchell (OSD)Brig. GeneralWilliam H. Craig(JCS)Mr.  (CIA)Mr. George McManus (CIA)(The Department of State was not represented although invited.)2. The Attorney General outlined to us How it all started, findings as they

                        of the population, particularly 

                        disruption of the supply of Cuban nickel to the Soviet Union. D. PsychologicalTask 25:USIAto submit plan by 15 February

text not declassified] agents inside the target area. 

House StaffMr.Richard Bissell,CIAMr.Tracy Barnes,CIACol.J.C. King,CIAMr.Berlechaired the meeting. The

                        Acting Chief,WH-4, and Acting Chief, 

                        Cuba, two aircraft.2. On 9 April the briefing team departed Washington for . The purpose of

                        recruiting efforts in that city and possibly in other countries, .

                        and to develop sabotage activities. In addition there are some 

                        numbers . No subsequent

                        remainder.  showed the enemy

                        to 

                        Consequently only the questioning will be recorded here.76. Col.Hawkinsasked 

                        were motivated by patriotic reasons.78. 

                        This was Tuesday afternoon about 1800 hours local time. Col.Hawkinsremarked that  indicated they

                        the ship that was sunk and that there was no commo.81. Mr.Kennedyasked if the Cuban pilots did well. 

                        plan for use of smoke to identify our own people on the ground and 

                        out. Col.Beerliasked  if

                        possible policy questions: 20 (balloons), 23 (Swan Is.), 27 (sabotage),  40

                        Blagar.49. In the face of continuous air attacks, at 10 o'clock  the contract

                        unnoticed if timed with proposed U.S. military enlistment of Cubans.4) Other Tasks.I note here thatCIAdoes not feel it has the

                        Cuba. (CIAandUSIA).25. 28. (Sabotage Cuban assets outside Cuba, as targets of opportunity.) Note

                        May.3. 4. Extensive penetrations into Cuban-Latin American activities. Legal

                        countries are being used.5.  In

                        through the sentence ending and carry out sabotage. At this point  was

                        On the one hand, certain information such as the recent  report ofCastro's own statements would lead one to the

The President, referring to his forthcoming trip to Costa Rica,5wanted to be

                        ship had left Rostov on October 11 and Leningrad on October 14. The destroyerPierceis following the ship which is still outside the barrier. SecretaryMcNamararecommended that we not

                        minimum consistent with military necessity.3. 4. In view of the above, the recommendations contained in paragraph 3 of

                        now.SecretaryMcNamara. If we could do this

                        military planning provided for 500 sorties to take out theSAMsites, theMIGs in Cuba, and the missiles and missile sites. The President expressed his concern that the alternatives we are facing have

                        immediately, the Chiefs recommended implementation on Monday5ofOPPlan 312, i.e. a major air strike, and, seven days later,OPPlan 316, which is the invasion plan. SecretaryMcNamaraasked what we

                        prevailed for a long time.2.  I made it

At the conclusion of the meeting, Mr.McGeorge

Speaker?: Um.JFK: Just have to [words unintelligible] and do it. Probably ought to tell

                        tracks.JFK:  We

1 line of source text not declassified] to Cuba, .3. A proposed Presidential statement on Cuba, originally suggested byUSIAbut not yet been made, will be looked at

                        Also, we will not have control over the exact timing of the raids.Dez said that probably one of the best targets inside Cuba is the . It

The President authorized three low-level sorties of two planes each, one over

                        information on Cuba, including photographs and refugee reports, .

                        dangers for Cuba. Promised to

                        control. The crew itself does not know where the missile is targeted.  GeneralNorstadspoke very negatively

declassified] The Prime

declassified] The Prime

                        President andMacmillanand our proposals to make a

                        discipline. 

                        working relation between a Gaullist France and a Federal Republic underErhard. The most

                        substantial and would generate great concern, particularly in the UK. 2. The alternative proposal of a multilaterally owned and controlledNATOMRBMforce is more plausible in a sea-based

                        of the courses available to us in dealing with them, theMLFis the only safe one.  I am

                        go along, ,Finally, I am glad that you

                        policy. The Secretary asked how Mr. Wilson thought the Common Market outlook

                        reassure the Alliance. He thought that our own objectives and Mr.Stikkers were fundamentally the same:  to achieve

                        Government policy of systematic opposition to him and his govt.I am fully sympathetic with your impatience with Gaullist negativism.  Nevertheless

                        fact, . We

                        Germanswho are on the front linewithout giving away our control? Mr.Bundyinterjected to say that that

                        Omaha, minus multilaterally owned and operated ships and submarines, 

                        strategy. In other

     The

                        cooperation, stemming from the EisenhowerMacmillanagreement of December 20, 1957, . I have

                        situation. 

                        objects of US policy.3)  but

                        importance to private talks with me without the others being present.  it

                        weapons byNATOin self-defense .NATOaction on these matters represents

                        uneconomically high by any objective standard.What the United States Should Do AboutMattei:Ambassador Achilles then raised the question of what we should do aboutMatteiin the future,  we could

                        as against the present arrangement, moved on to the problem of control. [2 paragraphs (21 lines of source text) not

                        value. SecretaryMcNamarasaid that if theMLFwere accepted by the Europeans, he

rising tide of refugee flow into West Berlin; (4)  reports.While some measure of unrest can be attributed to spreading difficulties

dislocations, I can foresee real possibility of explosion, .It is of course somewhat early to forecast trend of events in Soviet

actions.4. GeneralNorstadmentionedAdenauer's forthcoming visit

    ()

    Referring to the aide-mmoire handed the Secretary by AmbassadorGrewe, Mr.Kohlerobserved that it concentrated on

Authority in which a majority vote would be determinative.  The

following is the gist of Colonel Baldry's report to me. Something would also have

that the time to strike will soon arrive.1 On the other hand, he expressed

. In fact, one of the

 that KingPaulhad advocated to him the related party

unalterably opposed to such a solution in Greece. It occurs to me that the

commanders until early hours of morning lend  are back in

achievements of U.S. military sciences.19. 20. Show the flag regularly in Finland through visits of Naval vessels,

theDepartment of StateSourceAnkara,332. Department telegram 212.1We have reviewed with  in detail

neutral. It

demarche to him. (3) PresidentKekkonenhad made

                        theEmbassy in Jordan1Washington,116.  Group

                        continue.He said substantially the things he had said to Yatsevitch as stated in 

                        Americans. I

                        less than even. (Paras. 27, 3335)4. 5. Israels foreign policy will remain based principally on its need for

                        were:Mr.Meyer,NEAMr. Kerr, EMr. Costanza, TreasuryMr.Hansen, BOBMr.Komer, White HouseMr. Gatewood,INRMr.Miner,GTIMr.Marcy,GTIMr.Bowling,GTIMr. Miklos,GTIMr.Meyerdistributed copies of a

                        Dimona reactor, we cannot ignore this possibility.Should Israel contemplate weapons manufacture, one inhibiting factor, 

                        are the same people as those who planned a coup a year ago.  However, it

                        about realistic planning coming from that source.

                        identified with the government, but the time scale is doubtful.

                        so far not been able to come up with anything.

                        resolving all doubts as to the peaceful intent of the Dimona project. Therefore, I asked our scientists to review the alternative schedules of

                        place a serious strain on our relations with him.(b) Probe in Israel Hence,

                        merely be able to set off a nuclear explosion or would it be a weapon?  Mr.Nitzesaid the Pentagon believes

                        years, and the probable consequences of such programs.ConclusionsA. B. We believe that Israel is undertaking the development of a 250-300

                        as aftermathHussein-HaikalSeptember interview in Paris.FYI: We have no corroboration to date, but note  reporting King's

                        taken (for reasons similar to De Gaulle's).We're pushing ahead on plans for next inspection of Israeli reactor .Israel's current campaign publicizing German technical help toUAR2suggests not only

                        Near East. 

; 5)

                        useful side benefits would be derived from the attempt.II. The Advanced Weapons Problem:A. B. TheUAR's compulsion to counter such a

                        difficult to handle from the standpoint of United States policy.  If we

                        for the next five years. (Paras. 10-13)D. Israel has contracted with a French firm for 250 sophisticatedSSMs .

                        wide variety of other ways which are well known to both of us. I can well appreciate your concern for developments in theUAR. But I see no present or imminent nuclear

they had dreamed up everything from missed appointments inLeoto 3.Adoula's own past relations with

dubious about mediation idea. 

views.  The Secretary then

100 percent wrong. Spaaksaid he feels best way for

              Wheelus Base and our growing oil interests. Backing Hasan is a gamble. We [less

              base.As to your formal meeting, I suggest you press three points (the Prince is normally a

               Morocco (and the whole Maghreb) is

              active consideration.  it will be necessary to

              has pursued  policy abroad, keeping

              King's  explanation on

              concern on his part.  do you think that

              appreciably, with a direct effect on limited war or contingency actions.  Loss of support for

              large exodus from both areas that will soon be moving through Northern Rhodesia. Meanwhile bloc programs for wooing refugees are increasing particularly in

              on a strictly private basis the current payments.2. Any payments made  toRobertowill be intermittent, through a secure,

              .Our best bet is still to keep loose, while working behind scenes to get a cease-fire.

              from dealing on both sides of the curtain.While I believe thatBonsaland State have not

              Rabat before Mennen Williams gets there on 2 October.3. That you give him a  message for

              (Tab A) .Key points on this visit:1. This is primarily a personal exchange between two world statesmen. The Emperor is

              be 46 Algerian students here under 

              of support, etcetera.In response to this the Agency sent us a biographic sketch ofRoberto.

              which utilize primarily the resources of the Military Establishment.a. Expose by all means  Communist

              appropriate US agencies, but by the use of the third party principle.)b. Discredit  Communist oriented or

              the fullest extent.)c. Assist  pro-Western opposition

              cease-fire in a hurry, .Apparently Hassan andBBagreed to meet with Selassie

                Komerof the National Security Council Staff to PresidentKennedy1Washington,.Attached  message from King Hassan2shows he's getting worried

              to us for reassurance.We think a prompt  reply is in

                and Moroccan Policy Toward Algeria2. Comments of Mohamed Laghzaoui on Moroccan Policy Toward Algeria1. Mohamed Laghzaoui had discussion withAhmed Ben

              just when Moscow and Peiping are moving in.If Ben Bella were in real trouble 

              his  efforts acquire armswithout any indication careful planning, either from

              through Asmara, Ethiopia . There are no

the North Korean establishment. Without that assurance 

consideration by US authorities. Once specific plans were obtained, 

    

    

armistice.(3) 

conventional mission, to give any more authority to count on use of 

the use of nuclear weapons any aggression by N. Korean forces.b. c. Space can be found for a U.S. division force in the Philippines, Guam

Defense Command, ChiefMAAG,AIDMission Director,  should brief

cable shortly containing more detailed recommendation.5. Consider urgently in Washington proposing toGRCa program of substantially increased  probing

    through 26 April 1961CIAcommencing 21 April reported on

political solution.C. As required use such other means as are available,  to influence

exists. It is visible to the Chinese in the form of U.S. 

basis, open aggression by combined ChiCom/KorCom forces. Option B4. This assumed defense policy is identical with Option C, except that it

that the Chinese would retaliate with whatever indigenous  they might have

     forces in the area

pressures. (Para. 16)3. Pacifist and neutralist sentiment, born of Japan's  fear of

     In

involved.10. The President asked how many intelligence agents theGRChad on the mainland. TheGRCdepends to a considerable extent

not likely that the planes involved would be shot down.Chiangreplied that this had been discussed 

divisions in the Fukien area. We said that we did not know . The

adventures launched under the past Administration . It keeps going

    

    declassified]Against these overwhelming objections the gains are negligible.  This

    declassified]The truth is that the operation continues because it got started. This argument holds in effect that we must inherit and carry out

fact because he canceled the support operations after the U-2.) [1 paragraph (6 lines of source text) not

confined for a while in the hospital, I have directed  to discuss a

Chinese Communist military buildup in the Taiwan Strait area. 3. The extent of buildup was described. In response to his questions the

    . He

the US is but a reflection of the official US attitude toward them. 13. The members of the military junta are fully aware of Korean

contacts with one or two who are close to Pak; through 

Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)SourceTaipei,. Reference: .1Pass following to Dept of State

which rules South Korea has been caused largely by controversy . We

                        source), recall your previous discussion, inquire whether  remarks based on

 we

                        in his attack onSEATO.  reiterated U.S.

                        impression,Saritthanked  for

                        this, all of which have been reported already either through Embassy 

                        After much heated discussion on this matter,Saritthrew up his hands and said, You win, 

                        reported .2Saritagain spoke ofSouvanna, bringing up the usual points and then added, And

                        which has been reported by the Embassy in Vientiane.)  finally toldSaritthatSarithad no alternative but to go along

                        to student activities) and would authorize provision of equipment  for

                        out likelihood of provocation. I

                        true, it was no longer true under present administration. I toldSukarnoI was glad to hear his

                        have been rejected.2. 

                        Burmese Governments.3. 

                        Burma, and now learning of his presence Vienna.He spoke frankly that purpose his visit was his wifes  health. She

                        that this had no connection with purpose his visit.At dinner, Mrs.Ne Win

                        but he stuck to his figure.He had great deal to say in criticism of past operations of ICA, mentioning certain individuals by

                        could lead to a much stiffened Indonesian attitude toward this case .In these circumstances, AmbassadorJoneshas recommended, and I concur, that a letter from you

                        really back up VPs assurances.

                        still a preventable evil; and (3) the U.S. breaks faith with Taiwan.4. Serranoon May 9 

                        United States in the Philippines. AmbassadorHickersonis presently on home

                        thought it might be repeated. He also thought that it might be possible  to

                        effort obtain his agreement:1. 

                        our projects are not complete.)B. 

                        instability.4. The Shans which operate against theGUBembarrass the Thai Govt.5. On the positive side, there is no evidence of significant communist inroads

                        determination to beat the communists inSEA. no

                        his health. 

                        additive.  a

                        the money if Thailand can recruit the people. we

                        on US troop support.II. T-B Improvement of National Intelligence Effort the

                        (2) theDCI, and (3) the military, 

                        street. More

                        IntelligenceMcConeSourceWashington,. a number of

declassified]

                        force them change position. Dutch

                        whatever equity U.S. has built up over last number of years may be lost  for

                        terms with U.S. we

                        meantime I strongly urge that serious consideration be given to 

                        disposition of West New Guinea freelyagreed upon by the Dutch and the Indonesians. To sum up his governments position, Ambassador Beale continued, Australia

.

                        were two Australian frigates in Malaysian waters, however.Barwicknoted that Lord Home  had

                        had advised Rolz-Bennett that this should not be pressed. He said that  the

declassified] appraisal of the current situation.  is

                        be training Thai Meo cadres in North Vietnam.4.  the

                        Association (TEA), the latter  a

                        warfare prior to being returned to Thailand as cadres.5. 

[1 paragraph (10-l/2 lines of source text) not

                        Presidents Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)SourceWashington,.McGB/WWRI disagree with so many of the half judgments inBissellsIndonesiapaper1 that I dont

                        help. 

                        behavior is, in a psychological sense, understandable.  He is also terribly

declassified] individual with a deep sense of  insecurity . He

that we will never tolerate a military attack by him upon Cambodia.  A

                        exemplified by the Philippine Presidents speech on September 4th.1We 

                        attack onWNGis impossible .10On the other hand, whileSukarnois also said to be very worried by the economic and

                        a newWNGcampaign . Another report indicates that a

                        while retaining the loyalty of the Army.Nasutionand GeneralJani, the new Chief of Staff of the Army,  recognize the need

                        support problem. In this case, Phnom Penh would prepare materials  and

                        reveals that it was unarmed. the

                        Government of the Republic of China represent one facet of this,  are a

                        Burmese believed them.Comment:Against this background,  report from

                        situation,Sihanouk, 

                        framework of Constitution and peace and order would be maintained.Garciacontinues receive from

                        count of a nature which, in spite of reliable sources,  best described

                        photo in their house when intoxicated, as I have reported . WhileSarithas managed so far to keep this

                     strategic hamlet program in the Mekong Valley area.11) Initiate aerial reconnaissance of Laos byICC.12) TimingBegin immediately.Phase 2ObjectiveThe objective remains the same as in Phase 1.RationaleA decidedly increased military effort in Laos, including some measures overtly

                     conjunction with other moves under this Phase.6) 7) 8) Further enlarge pro-Western guerrilla units in Laos and expand operations in

                     use, 

                     Phase I).3. 4. 5. Further enlarge pro-Western guerilla units in Laos and expand operations in

                     Geneva Agreements:1. Consider the re-entry into Thailand of selected U.S. combat forces.2. 3. Move U.S. Air Force units into Thailand.4. Move U.S. naval carrier task force off South Vietnam.Group CActions which involve or lead to overt violation of the Geneva Agreements and

                        

                     endanger our relations with Souvanna. On the other hand,  it would be possible

                     to win the election.3. 4. There was disagreement betweenFEandAIDover our approach to future budget support. The

                     thus releasing other Lao resources for such political purposes. 5. There had been a discussion at a meeting in the morning, which I did not

                     how we can make it work more effectively.8. At the end of the discussion there was some consideration of the question of

                        line of source text not declassified] pointed out  that the Viet-Minh

                     with Souvanna that permitted us to get food supplies to the Meos.  They

                     theICC. Messrs. Hilsman  responded that they

                     to have a clear picture of U.S. policy.3. 

                     consider this because, as far as we could see, this is about the only way out.4. 

                        of source text not declassified] for what it may be worth,  Phoumi

                     would declare Condition Yellow underSEATOPlan 5. We could also begin introducing additional military advisers to theFALand could probably persuade .4. In order to get cooperation from Thailand and the other countries in the

                     consistency with the Geneva Agreements.I. Covert OperationsII. Overt OperationsAt the present time the United States is engaged in two distinct types of

                     journalist that there was no need to worry about suspension of US aid . Phoumi has

                     that 

                     Chinese volunteers intervene, we will have to go after South China.  We must

                         to

                     between the State Department on the one side and Defense  on the other. We did

                        .

                     Ambassador, the Thais seem to be entering a new phase of  uncertainty. Their

                     internal security situation while maintaining a polite boredom about Cambodia and Laos. We should

                     dollar drain.5.Harrimanthen stated Souvanna  had

                     hospital, school, and turning it over to Laos a better procedure.8. 9. President left; thenHarrimanand DCI

                     group together to form a united party, and how we can help.(4)Harrimanurged we keep  in

                         of

                        Secretary of DefenseGeneral L.L. LemnitzerGeneral Paul J. FontanaCentral Intelligency AgencyGeneralC.P. CabellMr.Richard M. Bissell, Jr.United States Information AgencyMr.Edward R. Murrow,

                        Gilpatric,William Bundy,Kenneth Hansen, ,Robert Johnson)SecretaryRuskmade a brief presentation

                     help of someone such as AmbassadorBrown to

                     and that we should seek to obtain 500 additional Thai advisers.There was some discussion of the proposal for photo reconnaissance . In response to

                        conclusions:31) .

                     isolate Phoumi, short of sanctions:a. b. Withdraw Brig. General Boyle from Laos, keeping him nearby in case of need,

                     however,Kong Lewas visited by  pilot

                     desperate; today they are hopeful. The local neutralists  andPhoumi(to Amb) have both voiced optimism today over

                     Seato protection.The group then turned its attention to the draft telegram.  whether it was

                     prolong the talk of the Princes over a period of several months.  it was

                     indicated that we were asking information on the subject from the French.  the

                     the Viet Minh are actually withdrawing and the numbers involved.  Among our

                     Senator Russell's suggestion of the possibilities for covert operations, . He stated that

                     out. The President asked AdmiralFelthow

                     and did leave us open to continued torture in this situation.The President indicated several points. We could run supplies in  from Bangkok if

                        These instructions are being repeated eyes only to Ambassadors at Moscow,

                     shortly.  The

                     responsibility by theMAAG, d) expanded  support

                     declassified] Mr.Cummingalso mentioned that we should not

                     Pathet Lao. There is thought of arming them with mortars, .7. The extreme difficulty with the French in Laos was discussed at some length.

                     to thePL. They have introducedDRVpersonnel. We have introduced a few 

                     inherent advantage.In considering the possible introduction of Thai troop units  consideration must

                     declassified]8c. Preparation

                     in tactical units (33 jets) from which forces could be drawn for .South Viet-Nam possesses seven divisions, one airborne group, and 88 aircraft

inspection areas. (It was

because history had indicated that Air Force reconnaissance 

requirements and between military and other general requirements. 6. I then asked him what he conceived to be the role of theDCIin respect to these matters including

projectsf. g. more emphasis on political action in underdeveloped areash. development of our capability for covert limited warfarei. increased records mechanization.In this major effort to improve the organization of the CS but most

changes in the organization and management of the CS were made. Through these organizational changes, revision and simplification of

centralized operations staffs.19. 20. In order to make the most effective use of our resources in the

Irvin, Department of Defense (Vice Chairman); CIA; Dr.Irvin Stewart,OEP,

needs.3. A task force concerned with communications in the  area has

new piece of intelligence is that we have some new  photography

    Station in Saigonto theAgency1Saigon,.. 1. Maj GenNguyen Khanhon 28 Jan told

    source text not declassified]a. 

    Station in Saigonto theAgency1Saigon,.CASSaigon 3902. Ref .2Following are AmbassadorLodge's comments on ref.1. Your .

    importance .The purpose of these communications would be to make very clear both the

taken to provide more Vietnamese radio talent. It was noted that 

solid program is beginning to fall apart in that region. A 

    source text not declassified] paramilitary functions.He should have a call uponMACV,USOM, the Embassy and  for support

one. The French can be counted upon to stir up trouble. Lodgehas to be persuaded

season are critical. The

different matter.

probably there won't be attacks againstSVN. But they are possible, so must be prepared. SecState referred to Cuba II. We did not expect USSR to strike with

strikes against the North . The

Intelligence Agency1Washington,.SUMMARYThe over-all situation in South Vietnam remains extremely fragile.

for his evaluation and decision as to action (Deptel 1463).63. To support a Program for National Mobilization (including a national

essential.2. The Department of State bringsSEATOallies up to date on 

existing situation in the Labor Party is real.4. In this situation one course might be to let the  Labor Party

and elements in support of the above programs, e.g. etc. Third

general information on Viet Cong political activities. Bounties for Apprehending Viet Cong LeadersIn April the Mission approved a bounty program aimed at apprehending

    7. Public Announcement and Press Backgroundinga. The public announcement should include the following points:(1)GVNand US have agreed that bombings

on-going program of covert support and financial assistance 

declassified].CIAfunding of 

OperationsAs noted above, the requirements for these programs stemmed fromNSAM328 and earlier approvals ofCIAstation programs . Previous

direction of a wide variety of youth activities. Through 

was told of the arrangements worked out for the release of 

further exchanges of viewpoints either in the established 

MinisterVienand GeneralLoanhad held with our  officer.2These have been most

suggestions on the conduct of the campaign. It was made clear 

developed and controls several sources reporting from ; it has

happily rejected, which would have assembled the members of 

favorable weather for a drop into North Vietnam.

Seventh Air Force.

approach toKythrough a 

AD, with him, however, leaving the real bite of EF to your 

the Secretary of State:I have studied the Department's message of 21 June, received throughCASchannels,2in the light ofKy's decision to rein inLoanas first reported in .3Ky's proclaimed intentions, which

prepare the people involved in the release ofMai Thi Vang, specifically GeneralLoan. When  pointed out,

Colonel Huan andVienassured  he would do

    declassified] have both seen this message.  left

    of source text not declassified] linguists and/or 

politics. This activity will cost initially an estimated 

from the incumbent power structure and its political orientation.  As the

TheCIAassessment  is that the

movement can be brought together. The initial cost will be about 

 with whomCASis in contact. In the case of Huong,

    declassified] are available in theCIAFY68 budget. An additional 

candidates are running, for the most part on their own. Clearly, the nature and scope of our election program will depend upon

    declassified] political action and advisory effort with GeneralKy. Thieu 2has informedKythat he (Thieu) has neither a

influence their directions in the manner outlined below. Using the 

framework of the Department's message of 30 June viaCAS,3I am authorizing 

uneasy balance between these two rivals. Through the  channel (and

genuine, broad political party Vietnam urgently needs. This 

                     continuing  effort in Vietnam

                     their home territory, there were certain drawbacks in the managementand problems in the implementation  in

                     engaged in the program. Because of this record of effectiveness, AmbassadorKomerhas requested 

                     Vietnam.  sponsorship is

                        of source text not declassified].22. ProblemOn 1 December 1967, the 303 Committee approved a proposal to provide  to

                     asking the 303 Committee to authorize the passage of an additional  for the

                     encourage the evolution of Vietnamese political groups and authorized  for

                     amounts:U.S. 

                     would provide most of the Lien Minh finances.)(3) 

                     whom 

                     time for remedial steps if it grows to critical proportions.4f. Support Required from Other AgenciesNone.g. Timing of the Operation AmbassadorBunker's direction when it is endorsed

                     for the remainder ofFY1969.  would be expected to

should be made aware of.President: What is the feeling between the Germans and the French?Fowler: Considerable. There wereundoubtedly this pressure that was felt in the meeting of the

to effective 

Moscow #2624.)53. Rotary-head recorders, such as theTR4andTR22, could:(1) Improve Soviet intercept capabilities;(2) Improve Soviet 

improvement in their 

            VI36) but its capabilities for the strategic exchange phase are equated to . This conclusion

              text not declassified].The project's code-name is Furtherance.We recommend three major changes:We all recommend this.Walt Rostow: We think it is an essential change.

              declassified] on the other hand, we can buy an effective defense ofCONUSas insurance against a failure of deterrence.  allow us to

            missiles surviving to attack Soviet military targets, while withholding enough for . For this task,

            and Soviet forces.U.S. and Soviet Intercontinental Nuclear Forces a196819701972U.S.SovietU.S.SovietU.S.SovietTotal Force LoadingsWeaponsa Shows the U.S. programmed force and theNIEfor the

            Soviet surprise attack and carry out an effective second strike. How much damage these surviving weapons could cause depends on the effectiveness of

              of source text not declassified]C. Against the Greater-Than-Expected Soviet ThreatThe vital importance of our Assured Destruction capability to our national security

              declassified]. Putting  Mk-3s on

              declassified]. Our programmed force can cope with a greater-than-expected SovietABMsystem because we already have programmedABMhedgesPoseidon plusMIRVs and penetration aids for Minuteman.By putting  Mk-3s on each Poseidon

            TheJCS-recommended inventories of  Unit Equipment (UE)

            Assured Destruction capability against theGTEthreat.1.Increase Warheads on Poseidon2.Add Terminal Penetration Aids for PoseidonWe could develop terminal decoys for Poseidon. These decoys would aid in penetrating

            alert rate to 60%.b All cruise missiles are assumed to have warheads, and  of

               or

            CapabilityAgainst theGTESoviet Threat a$ BillionsR&amp;D10-Year System Cost bDefense of Minuteman$0$ 7Threat A c08Threat B dAdditional Minuteman in Hard Rock SilosThreat A.312Threat B.310NewICBMThreat A2.614Threat B2.61220 Additional Poseidon Submarines0145 Additional Poseidon Submarines With Decoys on All Poseidon.2312ULMSSubmarines2.0133ULMSSubmarines With Decoys on AllULMSand Poseidon2.25a Costs are over and above the cost of programmed forces with 

            Soviet Reaction to a U.S.ABMSystem (In Millions)U.S. ProgramSoviets Strike First, U.S. RetaliatesU.S. Strikes First, Soviets RetaliateSoviet Assured Destruction CalculationU.S. KilledSoviet KilledU.S. KilledSoviet KilledNoABM120As the table shows, the Soviets lose their deterrent if they do not respond. They would

            what happens if the Soviets do respond.Deaths In an All-Out Strategic Nuclear Exchange in 1977,Assuming a Soviet Reaction to a U.S.ABMSystem(In Millions)U.S. ProgramSoviets Strike First, U.S. RetaliatesU.S. Strikes First, Soviets RetaliateSoviet Assured Destruction CalculationU.S. KilledSoviet KilledU.S. KilledSoviet KilledNoABM120As part of their response, the Soviets could add large numbers of offensive missiles,

            declassified]C. ConclusionsOur analysis of theABMsystem and its relationship to

              declassified] Mk-3RVs per Poseidon missile. (TheJCSrecommend an initial load of  Mk-3s per missile, at an additional cost of $217

            and a total of  inFY7074. Continuing development of Poseidon and, inFY70, procuring 181 missiles and converting six Polaris

               ismore than adequate, particularly in .4It is not clear,

            RECOMMENDATIONS BY THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFFWITHFY69 BUDGET IMPLICATIONS6A. Strategic Retaliatory Forces1. The Secretary of Defense recommended maintaining a Minuteman force of  for each Minuteman II. TheJCSconcurred in the Minuteman force level, but

               by endFY72. TheJCSand the

               by 1975 if a review in

            reaffirmed his recommendation.C. Theater Nuclear Forces1. The Secretary of Defense recommended phasing out 18 Mace in Europe and 36 Mace  inFY69. TheJCSand the

            affirmed the Mace phase-out in Europe, but deferred the Mace phase-out in  untilFY70.2. The Secretary of Defense recommended phasing out one Pershing battalion now inCONUSinFY69. TheJCSand the Secretary of the Army recommended against

              . TheJCSand the Secretary of the Air Force recommended increasing the tactical

            insufficient. The Secretary of Defense then recommended a stockpile of  tactical nuclear bombs inFY69 and 

            warhead stockpile to  warheads per U.S.

            warhead stockpiles, compared to the program recommended by the Secretary of Defense:These recommendations are now under review.D. Army and Marine Corps Land Forces1. TheJCSrecommended the following totalFY69 Army force structure compared to that recommended by the

            organizations in New York is, apparently, December 18.Under the proposal we would:2Provide  million in a lump sum payment

              ]8c. But what happens afterwards? Mr.Katzenbachalluded to special legislation towards a public communications authority or other overt

            indicate they intend to continue.l. m. n. On the question of fund raising, Mr.Katzenbachfelt that witting corporate contributors presented no problems

            missiles.  This radar is

              source text not declassified].Mr.Fosternoted that the system we proposed to deploy would .He said that the eye of the system is the radar. To deny the enemy an opportunity to

            undertake consultations with our other allies.5He said that we would also be talking to the  here and that our

            Council tomorrow. He then asked if the Canadians had any questions. Mr.McNamarasaid that all equipment would be in the United

            would give  coverage in Canada. It was stressed,

            all of the United States but it does have some technical limitations. Ambassador Ritchie asked if [less than 1 line of source text not

            of the U.S. deployed system by lowering the detonation ceiling from . The point made here was that

              1964,3that:4. (TS) In response to a proposed draft memorandum for

            weapons. 9. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that:[5 paragraphs (161/2 lines of source text) not

              source text not declassified].The  is a

            control.Since the  is

            declassified].If theAECwere given access to the  they might challenge .As you are aware, .Recommend that you dissuade theAECfrom further

              .I expect to use the calculations in this paper in the next Presidential Memorandum on

            Availability Date (OAD) of August 1970.c.  I estimate theFY1967 costs of the Air Force R&amp;D program at

            forces would still survive.Total ForcesTotal SurvivingMissile WeaponsNumberOf these surviving forces, [1 line of source text not

              Population of 140 Million)Delivered Warheads100The figures on population fatalities and industrial damage have been revised on the

            not appreciably change the results. In fact, when we go beyond about .It is clear, therefore, that our strategic missile forces alone would be sufficient to

            deliberate Soviet nuclear attack on the United States or its Allies. Thus, the

              1 line of source text not declassified] (even with Posture B) would be  U.S. fatalities

              declassified] and provided for Damage Limiting Posture B, would be .The costs of the various Damage Limiting programs would, of course, be spread over a

            targets, we cannot have high confidence of reducing fatalities below .2. Efficient Damage Limiting against the kinds of postures available to the Soviets,

            to hedge against that possibility.Four paragraphs omitted in this copy.6Our  can be

            First StrikeJuly 66Jan 70July 72SovietICBMs350738800U.S. Reliable Surviving Payload (KP)MinutemanIn both 1966 and January 1970 the Soviets are assumed to execute high value (and high

            Under these conditions, surviving land-based payload was reduced to . With the Polaris

            vehicles  per

                Land-Based1. No SovietCEPImprovementThe table shows that if the Soviets do achieve aCEPof

            by the fact that a force of 150 MIRVed SS9s with aCEPof  rather than

              line of source text not declassified] surviving in 1971 rather than .In summary, a SovietMIRVdeployment could pose a

            affect our sea-based missile force which, in itself, could deliver .3. Extreme Case: SovietMIRVWithABMHere we assume that the Soviets deploy an anti-ballistic missile defense simultaneously

            results of these calculations are shown below:Jul 69Jul 70Jul 71Jul 72Jul 73SovietICBMsTotal650650650650650MIRVed SS9s (incl. in total)25100150200200SovietABMReliable Area Interceptors8001300190024003000U.S. Payload Surviving (KP)MinutemanThis case illustrates the effect of a hypotheticalvery strong and very earlybut

            below:Payload (pounds)CEP(feet)Range (n. mi.)Minuteman II1,500TheICMis assumed in the calculations which follow to

            use the . A

               already well along in engineering development and second,

                Destruction:With Mk 12The last block of this table shows the number of survivable, reliable Poseidon missiles

            availability dates (OAD). In each case,  would be

              declassified]A number of alternative systems are currently under study. However, it is not yet clear

            shall not exceed  nuclear weapons. Such

            of Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission on April 3, 1967.2Accordingly, I approve a total of 

            Atomic Energy Commission of  nuclear

            reduction of  nuclear warheads duringFY1969 under the adjustedFY1968 stockpile.I have directed the production and retirement of those quantities of atomic weapons and

            wiser to transfer  in its entirety in a secure

            findings, there never would be a single solution. He also indicated that,  a proper

            operations through July 31, 1967, the end of the Foundation's fiscal year.  To meet these

            practical matter, no immediate results can be anticipated.Longrange Requirementsc. The above immediate arrangements would insure the continuance ofTAFprograms at nearnormal levels during the critical year

            changes.In the situation described in the document, the Chiefs described that .GeneralTaylorsaid there is a Furtherance

              (Bundy)1Washington,.MEMORANDUM FORThe Secretary of StateThe Secretary of DefenseThe Director of Central IntelligenceThe Administrator, Federal Aviation AgencyThe enclosed statement has been drafted for consideration at a meeting of the National

            developed to disperse designated successors to theNCAto existing facilities of the National Military Command System (NMCS) in the following manner:a. Based on the established line of succession to the individual offices comprising theNCA, the following three groups of alternateNCAshould be designated:b. The proposed alternate command groups have been kept small to improve their

            national deliberations.4. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that specific

            will  and have

              declassified] and aCEPof . The SS11 is a small,

               and aCEPof [less than 1 line of source text not

            each defended area.e. The extended-range Spartana three stage missile with a hot X-ray,  capable of

            assume that in the case of the Soviet Union, the destruction of, say, . Such a level of destruction would

                All-out Strategic Exchange (in millions), 1976bAssumes No Soviet Reaction to U.S.ABMDeploymentSoviets Strike First, U.S. RetaliatesU.S. Strikes First, Soviets RetaliatecU.S. ProgramsU.S. Fat.Sov. Fat.U.S. Fat.Sov. Fat.Approved100The first case, Soviets Strike First, U.S. Retaliates, is the threat against which

            about  fatalities. Assuming the Soviets

                Assumes Soviet Reaction to U.S.ABMDeploymentSoviets Strike First, U.S. RetaliatesU.S. Strikes First, Soviets RetaliateU.S. ProgramsU.S. Fat.Sov. Fat.U.S. Fat.Sov. Fat.Approved (no response)100In short, the Soviets have it within their technical and economic capacity to offset

            such a system could make in 1974 if the Soviets do not react to ourABMdeployment:Number of Fatalities in an All-out Strategic Exchange (in millions), 1974Soviets Strike First, US RetaliatesUS Strikes First, Soviets RetaliateU.S. ProgramsUS Fat.Sov. Fat.US Fat.Sov. Fat.NoABMDef100b Projection of Soviet Strategic Forces based on latestNIEs.But with a limited and low-cost reaction the Soviets could offset the benefits of this

            since the NSC Special Committee report of August, 1963.For the same reason 

            not exist. The Department of State feels that the coordination of countermeasures equipment

            the following factors to be pertinent to this decision at this time:a. The development, without atmospheric testing, of the proposed  laydown bomb for B52 delivery

            conceivably could be modified to accept such large boosters.3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that:a. A  weapon

            Chiefs of Staff on March 4, 1964.2You will recall that the instructions currently in use were approved by PresidentEisenhoweron December 3, 1959,3and were continued in effect by President

            billionABMprogram and they did not . Therefore, they would have to do

            the development of the extended range Spartan missile and its associated  required for

               only when

            responsibility .Ninth, the desirability of taking another close look at the possible uses of Sattahip

              text not declassified] About 

            satellite systems .

              4.Review of Reports. The Board has required the submission of

            handling of 

              .5. 6.Strengthening of the National Signals Intelligence Program.

              lines of source text not declassified]7. 8.Attacking the Information-Handling Problem. In response to a

            clearances.11. Problem Areas of Long-Term SignificanceAlthough gratifying advances have been made in our national intelligence effort (a few

            control all 

            operations. 10.Counterespionage. Because of the unrelenting efforts of

            operating within the U.S.11. 12.Validation of Intelligence Requirements. There is an

            RECONNAISSANCEWe now have 

            satellite, which has been primarily aCIAdevelopment. pictures are taken

            indefinitely. will bring you

            to destroy about  in a

            Department of Defense and Bureau of the Budget on May 29, 1964).2Accordingly, I approve a total of 

            by the Atomic Energy Commission of 

            completion.f. NewSIOPguidance.g. Army-Air Force relations.I regret to report that the relations between the Army and Air Force in Washington have

              declassified] nuclear weapons ( nuclear warhead

            by the Atomic Energy Commission of 

            a planned retirement of  complete

            total of  complete weapons forFY1966 as may be necessary to adjust production schedules to

            Going to a Nuclear Defense MissionCINCONAD2CONAD Region Commanders(1) Establish Air Defense Warning [less than 1 line of source text

            believed that they could deliver warheads. This

            employment of .SPADATS, the worldwide satellite tracking system,

               In general, the

            demonstration.  Other

            date.On December 2, 1963, the Secretary of Defense approved investment expenditures of  for obtaining the

            difficulties in meeting the directed June 1964 date are forecast.Program 505On May 23, 1963, . The

            this purpose.  adaption kit. This

            for February and March 1964. Since the personnel required to perform the  operation and maintenance

            satellite is programmed.2.Strategic Nuclear Delivery Vehicles, Interim Reduction and

            weapons by ballistic or cruise missiles; andABMs.a.Land Based Missiles:Satellite photography has permitted the identification of all or nearly all the fixed

              lines of source text not declassified]b.Submarine Launched Missiles:c.Heavy and Medium Bomber Aircraft:d.Production of Strategic Weapons:3.Fissionable Material Production Cut-offSatellite photography is admirably suited to support any arms control agreement on the

            advance of actual operation.4.Nuclear Free ZonesThe proposal provides for the prohibition of nuclear weapons from defined geographic

            observation.5.Other ProposalsPhotographic satellites would have limited applications in providing background

              declassified].b. c.Bombs in Orbit:The US and theUSSRhave agreed to aUNresolution forbidding the orbiting of nuclear weapons.

              source text not declassified] each) and replaced them with  smaller weapons. The result was a 45 percent reduction

            did with the money, 

            available strategic offensive forces against our own.U.S. Weapons Surviving Soviet First Strike, 1972aAs shown, even after a Soviet first strike, some [less than 1 line of

               An even higher

            strong defenses.I believe that a clear and unmistakable ability to inflict [less than

            society. Against Higher-Than-Expected Threats. We cannot now be sure that theUSSRwould not deploy a very heavyABMin the FY6872 time period. The effect of adding a very extensive SovietABM(which would cost them the equivalent of $25

            that we include both these measures in the missile force.Against a strong Soviet missile force with accurateMIRVbut in the absence of an extensiveABMthe Assured Destruction capability of the recommended missile force would not fall . In fact, our

            threat are as follows:FY69FY70FY71FY72FY73Soviet FatalitiesMore extreme threats are possible, but they are so unlikely, given the state of Soviet

            Force and the Programmed Bomber Force is clearly adequate, and would amount to  fatalities.Our offensive forces make it dangerous and expensive for the Soviets to move in the

              .Ten-Year Costs Per Thousand Pounds of Payload (Millions of Dollars)Reliable and SurvivingIn The InventoryOn Alert &amp;ReliableLow Soviet AttackHigh Soviet AttackMinuteman II4.56.26.962.0Polaris A314.231.831.831.8Future candidate systems in these two classes are considered below:1. Poseidon: To hedge against an extreme threat, we could consider construction of new

               against the

            following kinds of wars:The Soviet damage potential against the U.S. in three kinds of war is depicted, with

            A and B. These figures

            missiles would be similar.Addition by the Soviets of relatively invulnerable missiles as a Soviet response to a

            strike without fully restoring Soviet first strike potential against the U.S.VI. Specific Recommendations on Major Force-Oriented IssuesPoseidon Deployment. Because Poseidon is so much more effective

            Polaris submarines to Poseidon. A fleet of 31 Poseidon boats will have  of a fleet of 41

            are $3.2 million.Last year I commented on some of the command and control vulnerabilities of theFBMforce. The Navy has generated a number of alternative

            rate of 40 

            FY70.  Bybuying full complements of warheads  in FY68, we will

            having excess reentry systems. I am also

            Minuteman programs be approved.The FY68 cost of the Minuteman penetration aid program is $91 million, with a total

            resulting in FY6771 savings of approximately $30 million.Nike-X Deployment.The following table shows the components

            $1.4 billion of RDT&amp;E funds to be spent:Limited Defense PostureHeavy DefenseNo. of Units$ BillionsNo. of Units$ BillionsRadarsTACMAR Radars7$1.73$1.0MARRadars0082VHFRadars6.36.3Missile Site Radars263.4407.9DM15X2 Interceptors12001.112001.1Sprint Interceptors1100.773003.1Total Investment Cost$7.2$15.6FY6776 Operating Cost$1.0$ 1.8AECCosts$ .7$ 2.0In view of the uncertainty of Soviet targeting and force structure response, and given

            to provide in Department of Defense custody as of June 30, 1966, up to a  nuclear elements. [less

            basis, but not to exceed  weapons, to

            which become irretrievably lost or damaged beyond repair.2. The Department of Defense is authorized to:a. Obtain custody of up to a total of 

            are required .In the long run, we feelTAF's vulnerability to press

               weapons previously scheduled for

               weapons will be retired either inFY1969 or possibly inFY1968. I would not be surprised to see this matter disposed of next Fall in

            Commission on June 6, 1966.2Accordingly, I approve a total of 

            by the Atomic Energy Commission of 

              declassified] nuclear warhead elements duringFY1968, resulting in a net reduction of 

            Anti-Ballistic Missile interceptors show that the U.S. can maintain approximately  in the Soviet

            interceptors in a precommitted loiter mode to intercept reentry objects , then they may limit their fatalities to about  through 1971 and to substantially less

            individually penetrate Soviet Defenses. Our penetration aids are in reality .There are other penetration aids that can potentially penetrate if the details of the

            considerable damage and apparently that was their intention.c. There was some discussion of the real costs of a full endowment solution. Mr.Vancefelt that the sum requested was too small.

              declassified]a reduction of .

               to a total of . Thus, the current proposal will cause a net reduction

            nuclear weapons which could be adapted for clandestine introduction into the US. 7. Nuclear weapons with weights of up to 1,5002,000 pounds could be brought across US

              lines of source text not declassified] a Chinese weapon could yield . The difficulties

            Foundation, . Mr.Rostowfelt that the Board of Directors

            Foundation for Thursday, 27 June 1968.2c.  Since State

            force of 384 on-line Poseidon byFY75, for a totalFY6973 investment cost of $4,998 million.  and plan on a force of 31

            with  MK3s per missile, but will cost

               allow us to

            megatons, launchers, and bombers.U.S. vs. Soviet Strategic Nuclear Forces/a/196819701972U.S.USSRU.S.USSRU.S.USSRBallistic Missile LaunchersSoftICBMs12814290128HardICBMs105472078210548591026105410201251FOBS01020502075MobileICBMs (non-add)(025)(0100)SLBMs6564346656123158656267318Total Launchers1710891980171010921362171013071644Intercontinental Bombers646150155558130150534105130Total Force LoadingsWeapons/a/U.S. programmed vs. National Intelligence Estimates (NIE) forUSSR.Numbers of missile launchers and bombers are a poor measure of the relative

              declassified] of the MK3 warheads programmed for Poseidon, with a  as many targets.Effectiveness of Alternative, Equal-Weight Payloads/a/ Weapons WeaponsNumber of airfields8.30.83Number of hard silos/b/1.70.83Number of small cities (100,000)2.90.83Number of medium cities (500,000)0.60.83Number of large cities (2,000,000)0.50.5Number of defensive interceptors needed to counter/c/11.01.1Total megatons0.510.0/a/Reliability equals  Circular

              not declassified]./b/ per square inch (psi) at ; three [less than 1 line

              text not declassified] of the Soviet people, including at least  of the people and

            missiles surviving to attack Soviet military targets, while withholding enough for .A. Against the Expected Soviet ThreatAgainst the expected Soviet threat, our strategic forces can survive a well-executed

            than  which I

              of source text not declassified] The recommended

            theNIE-estimated Soviet defenses and kill at least . Similarly, at

              . Our

            capability throughFY75 by putting  MK3s on each Poseidon missile, even if the Soviets

            would keep our Assured Destruction capability against this threat .U.S. Assured Destruction Against Greater-Than-Expected Balanced

                MK3s on Poseidon/a/The first percentage shows fatalities if we are required to kill at least . The second

            Offenses and Defenses(Percent of Soviet Population Killed)FY69FY70FY71FY72FY73FY74FY75FY76Programmed Force and either/a/The first percentage shows fatalities if we are required to kill at least  of the people in

              declassified] Minuteman defended or in  psi silos, when added to the

            could put up to  MK3s on each Poseidon

            missiles and buy  MK18MIRVs for each missile. We could have an all MK18 Minuteman

              ). In this case, we

               against the

                  source text not declassified] on all Poseidon0.06.6 Additional Minuteman in

            deploy six MIRVs on their improved SS9./b/The small-MIRVthreat assumes the Soviets will

            defenses would eventually lead us to spend about $40 billion.U.S. Killed In All-Out Strategic Exchange in 1976Assumes No Soviet

            Respond To U.S.ABM(In Millions)U.S. ProgramsSoviets Strike FirstU.S. Strikes First Soviets RetaliateU.S. FatalitiesSoviet Fat.U.S. FatalitiesSoviet Fat.Approved Program (Sentinel)120As part of their response, the Soviets could add large numbers of offensive missiles

            would be neither wise nor effective.B. Protection Against Small Urban AttacksA light U.S.ABMsystem would protect against a ICBMattack. By protecting the U.S. against such a threat,

              source text not declassified] nuclear intimidation of other  countries.  The area defense ofCONUSwould give us a realistic Damage Limiting capability

            the mid-1970s, as shown in the next table.U.S. Fatalities In a Small-Scale Attack/a/(In Millions)Number ofICBMsC. Civil DefenseCivil Defense provides low cost insurance for our people in the unlikely event of a

              separately.3The stockpile which you approved on 10 June 1967 authorized a total of  nuclear warheads4forFY1969. Reappraisal, in the light of the proposed

            of  warheads.

            due to technical difficulties. The reprogramming has caused a reduction of  in the number of [less

            for your consideration, consists of 

            achieved duringFY1970 by the production of . This is a net

            you:1. Approve the stockpile of  nuclear

            Inclosure 1.2. Approve the revised stockpile of 

            exceeded by  in the event of unforeseen

            areas under full U.S. control other than the U.S.) shall not exceed  weapons at endFY1969;

            declassified]Appendix BAuthorized Ceilings on Nuclear Weapon Deploymentsby Category of WeaponFY1969Western EuropeAtlanticPacificStrategic Offensive1Appendix CContingency DeploymentsQuantityCountry/CommandWeaponsFY1968FY1969ConditionsStrategic BombsStrategic Missiles for

            substitute for them. 

            material will increase proportionately. (Paras. 1219)C.  (Paras. 2023)D. Sweden will continue its peaceful nuclear program, but we believe the chances of its

            nuclear weapons. 

            on the order of 0.5 n.m. or better. The SS9 will probably carry a payload  as compared with

            was going to make such an announcement.5. Last May ,

            Offensive forces.Next, we design a least-cost Soviet defense to keep Soviet fatalities at  of their total

            capability), the residual U.S. missile forces can still deliver more than  equivalent

            Soviet Damage Limiting only posture. Again, this figure exceeds the  equivalent criterion for an

            System (SOSUS) and to the development of special  aids.d.Limited War. The Panel concludes that there is a definite

                        justification for the Force de Frappe. Pompidou has said that . Recently

 it

                        significant addition to the already large existing Soviet weapons stockpile.2. 3. 4. Such elimination would remove a potentially troublesome discrepancy

                        declassified].3. [Here follow Part II: The Likelihood of Seabed Weapons Deployment and Part

                        than relatively small, light weight lower yield weapons, . (Paras. 10-14,

                        development of . The rate of

                        of fissionable materials. Our estimates indicate that by 1975 Soviet U-235 production will increase by more than

                        degrees ofBMDpotential.d.  We must

7. (S) WhileACDAacknowledges the importance of a hot X-rayABMsystem, the argument set forth byACDAappears to be that theUSSRdoes not possess the needed know-how to

text not declassified] (Para. 21)4. 

                        assumed in the projected estimate. We estimate that by 1967 the  will

declassified] However, possible undetected tests and 

                        declassified]11. Future Weapon Development and Testing12. We have detected only three Soviet tests in the twelve months since the

                        more likely to emphasize the development of small-diameter 

                        (TTBT). On the

                        Soviets have developed an exoatmosphericABMsystem .

                        there is about an even chance that the Soviets have already 

    declassified]REFSOURCE AND APPRAISALThe following remarks were made to one or another of sources by the

view.7. 8. As being of possible significance in relation to the above, the

declassified]REF and AmEmbRome

    declassified] and whose views on occasions have been 

reflect opinions probably generally prevailing in the Italian [1 paragraph (2 lines of source text) not

    text not declassified] the above views were discussed with 

be selected by responsible political forces. This  officer also

prevailing in 1959. Subsequent to Mr. Howard's letter, 4For the above reasons, I reaffirm the statedDODposition in opposition to the export and would be most

expressed apprehension about his position in Spain.G. H. 2. Re foreign and local press coverage, Embassy hears:A. Reuters reported rumor that in village near Vera yesterday about 50

practical necessity admitting officially one bomb still missing.  It

recommendation subject to your concurrence.Meanwhile, by separate and somewhat unusual channels,  have let us

                        withdraw in practice even from political side of the Alliance.Krag(Denmark),  was particularly

                        attention, .The original enthusiasm of the Turks forADMs

                        record, . He

                        reply Von Hassel told him categorically that the German Government . It

       devices. Technical penetration would have furnished the Soviets foreign policy information involving

        Radio Liberty Committee and Radio Free Europe also

       and by .5. The following are the pertinent points of the interview: (In addition, the text of a

       relations.  in public

            Franco-German agreement requires that they meet at 6-month intervals.)28.  it is clear that Kiesin-ger found

            not declassified] report , Tsarapkin

            death, if you run, they'll eat your ass out. And I'm dealing with them every day.  And I just don't

            that the Germans would not go with us.WaltAttachment2Washington, September 23, 1966.The following is a position paper on the problem of nuclear non-proliferation prepared

    declassified]SOURCE

key military units which would be involved in the take-over. See 

King Constantine's personal secretary, Major Mihail Arnaoutis 

hospitalCovert Political Action re May 1967 Greek National

    declassified] the strong appeal ofAndreas Papandreouto discontented youth. 

change. 

wholeheartedly views contained in Athens 1184)3together with his Army Attach 

(24 February 1966)SOURCE

declassified]/15 December 66SOURCE

    declassified] Embassy

and where cautious effort on our part justified.

reservations.b.  the

3805) dated 11 February 1967.2c. 

theDepartment of State1Ankara,Critic 2. Immediately on receipt info transmitted 2I asked seeErkinurgently and was received at

points:1. What you are proposing is exactly what he asked our

Rumania and the Soviet Union with respect to military mattersACQ20 November 1968SOURCE1. On 20 November 1968 a senior member of the [less

through regular 

                        issue and such trips could prejudice 1) the Dimona inspections, 2)  and

                        Jordan was doing its share in the buildup against Israel.  Nevertheless, partial

                        to the President's message. He noted that, meanwhile,Nasserhad reactivated a long-unused 

                        thatCIAin the 50's had and then lost . That there

                        mentioned above can only give us more trouble in Egypt. The only

attaches are allowed to do here and what ours can do there.There is also a slight resentment in a tightly disciplined country .In regard to captured Soviet equipment, I am informed that everything is

Secret; . 1 page of

        uninflated boats were seen.(815)(Pagoda)Roger.815TribuneYou take 810 with you and return home, (

    of StateMcNamaraWheelerHelmsCliffordW.W. RostowMcG. BundyVanceE.V. RostowBattleHarry McPhersonHarold Saunders,CIAThe President came in at 6:50 p.m.George Christiancame in at 6:55

Secretary of State and White House for the President:Following is text message dictated (but not read) byAndersonin presence , and edited

military moves.In last night's Security Council meeting,Fedorenkodemanded withdrawal of forces after a

appraisal follows.2. We do not believe that the Israeli appreciation presented 

Harmel present, and reconvened early today.Cairo radio is calling on Egypt's Arab allies to attack Israel. 2. LibyaThe big US Wheelus base is becoming more and more exposed to nationalist

Secret; . 1 page of

     briefed on the Middle

Mr. Parmenter and 

progress of the fighting.II. [Omitted here is detailed discussion.]Overhead Reconnaissance:VI. Intensive overhead reconnaissance would have produced a substantial

a single Israeli plane.1. 2. I should also note at this point one of the soft spots in our record.

forces into Sinai with much fanfare.D. III. The result of all this, in effect, was to put the intelligence

     that

Israeli attack.1. IV. Early on May 23, Cairo time, Nasirwho by this time had accomplished

to other ships carrying strategic material to Eilat.A. Early on that same day, Washington time, we noted  that the

some of the more interesting examples:On May 26, the Office of National Estimates surveyed the situation,

on the Israeli-Jordanian front picked up during the night. On the Sinai Peninsula, the Israelis have apparently accomplished most of

Egyptians are in a state of panic over the military debacle.  Senior

conversation with ,Salah Nasirreiterates that he

with apparently whetherNasseragreed or not. For the

order.Recalling the atmosphere of the meeting, Mr.Helmssaid that conversation during the first couple of

periods. USNS Valdez will be directed to leave all availableMEtech support at Rota, Spain 

to the Israelis, this ranks as a casus belli.1.  an

declassified].A.  The

particularly one which could well bring U.S. commitments into play,  than

Secret; . 2 pages of

the possibility of hostilities in the Middle East, .The Watch Committee findings are as follows:1. On the basis of our review of all available intelligence, we do not

they explain why.23One underlying problem is, of course, that the Israelis feel that the

    Agency1Washington,.MILITARY CAPABILITIES OF ISRAEL AND THE ARAB STATESSummaryIsrael could almost certainly attain air superiority over the Sinai

lines of source text not declassified].2. Hussein's preoccupation with the danger of a major

                        been reflected in Embassy reporting.3.  Eban

                        andHussein's own counter-proposal. 4. 5. General DeGaulle, after hearingHussein's appraisal

                        Cabinet consensus on their negotiating position.You will recall from earlier messages that, if the meeting with the Israelis

                        know they have gotten an operational missile from the French.  This is

                        of the Jordanian weekend which provides some cover for a visit to Aqaba.2. 3. 4. While there has been some increase in press and public speculation about

                        violation of the August cease-fire agreement.

                        countries. We must have mutual trust and confidence. Mr.Warnkesaid that he would be gone

                        the A-4 aircraft to carry nuclear weapons.I would propose to tell AmbassadorRabinthat:(a) I am acting on the instructions of the Secretary of Defense;(b) ;(c) ;(d) Israel may consider such weapons to be a deterrent to hostile action by

replaced by expatriates, .3. The forces available to maintain internal security in Aden are

of not giving the impression that this prize will shortly fall toNasir.9.  At some point in the not

Aden and the Protectorate.  the

independence.  In

information on developments in the Arabian Peninsula in 

protecting U.S. interests to have some collaborators  rather than

pull out of Gulf sooner rather than later.)3. 

to push ourselves on reluctant Saudi military recipients. We have 

for Item 3Mr.  and Mr.  were present for Item

                        be leased to  on

 to theMobutugovernment. He urgedthat the committee live up to its

                        with 

                        U.S. policy objectives in the Congo.At theCImeeting I had read 2noting particularly the agenda items

6.Harrimanfavored recruitment of

                        use of 

                        underlined by disturbing developments reported Dars 10135and possibly by ,6both of which being repeated

                        covert support 

Project  was

                        authorized  for

                        estimated at . Should

                        is . For Fiscal Year

                        any of the more probable successor regimes to that of  support that if we were

                        gone for broke for so long that our reservoir of trust among  is disturbingly low.3. While we might be able count on Congolese venality and lust for power to

                        forces it claims to represent may be more formidable than those which  and/orRADECOhave rallied up to now.RADECOcurrentlynegotiating with Conakat and MNC/Kiwewa, but outcome

                        dissatisfaction with 

                        whether, what and how much is needed. For example 6are not in urgent need now.

7themselves seem to have been

Agency1Leopoldville,.SUBJECTSpecial Letter from Leopoldville StationACTIONNone, for your information1. I regret that the force of circumstances has prevented me from writing the

                        effective brand of diplomacy, he has been personally attacked by . According to

line not declassified]. It would appear that  objective in this campaign is

 personal

                        deliberations concerning a Belgian proposal thatNATOendorse Belgian direct military assistance toMobutu. conveyed the

                        that  was

                        requested  pass

                        discussions  in

                        prison ( Comment:

                        the Central Intelligence Agency1,.0283 . 1. Thanks

Congo1Washington,.Dir 24445 (Out 71749). Ref Leop 0783 (In 42022).21. Whereas policy still undergoing review, you are authorized continue  op until further

Agency1Leopoldville,..SUBJECT Letter for October

                        Leopoldville Station is devoting considerable time and energy to  operations designed to provide

                        is emphasizing its 

                        final decision, would be helpful have  to previously

                        transmitted to  explained his

State1Leopoldville,.990. Ref:Embtel983 (Notal).21. Devlincalled onMobututhis morning at 1130 local. He was

                        radical Africans, we wonder whether time has not come for .22. [COS] line might be that while political

 and his colleagues,ODYOKEwould be forced to take

                        the opposing side.3.  that his recent actions are extremely

                        opposing faction wins  and his

 contingency fund

                        representative to make an immediate covert payment of  toMobutuunder authority previously granted by the 303

                        approve an expanded program at an additional cost of . This amount would allow for the

1968)For: .1. [Mobutu] granted [Identity 1] an interview on 21 November,

                        complex in the center of downtown Kinshasa.G. -related matters. He

 in the past had

                        appreciation for the current cooperation between  and his services and asked [Identity 1] that this liaison be continued

                        the early training of 

 training has already been

                        of  covert

declassified], should concentrate on building strong  apparat and political

Wellborn,INR/DDCMr.  observed that one of the

Agency1Leopoldville,.5067 (In 46957). Ref Leop 4942 (In 35772).21.  have made considerable

                        problem.2.  running scared and

                        unfavorable current. Leop not prepared take risk that  will muddle through without our aid

 from programmed

                        take-over of all or part of the Congo. First year costs would be about . Subsequent annual

PROP type

                        disposition spontaneously becomes number one consideration.32. Raise above so you not confused by any apparent duplication. This channel

 PROP.6Advise.3. Have discussed 

81396).31.  has not been able penetrate

                        complicated when  goesEliz19 October. If case officer available,

                        and strong approach to theSYG.  was advised byPenfieldthis date thatODACIDhas every intention of doing this.

                        gradually weaken unless shored up. Chief  program no substitute

                        chance for strong govt despite good intentions and desires various . Size of coalition almost

                        long term  program along

                        provide a political action capability at the national level.3. This request for termination is, in a sense, a product of Project  success.ODACIDandKUBARKbelieve it is no longer necessary to engage in the

                        objectives are now different.4. All commitments and quit claims have been settled.5.  was approved for

ContinueMaritime, Air and Covert Funding Operations.a. On the request for approval to continue [cryptonym not

                        million dollar slash from the earlier high rate of expenditure .b. Mr.Glenn Fieldsand Mr.Lawrence Devlin,CASChief in Leopoldville, took pains to point out that a

                        emphasizedwith a substantial slash from the proposed  million to no higher than  with the full

in the Congo1.SummaryThis memorandum recommends that:(1)  maritime

                        1966, after which 

declassified].(2) The  air

.(3) Supplementary authorization for [less than 1 line not

                        the amount of .The objective of these programs, at an estimated total cost for CY 1966 of

                        belonging to the 

                        problema.Origin of the RequirementThe  maritime, air

declassified] crews, with the understanding that the  would be replaced

                        available.On 28 October 1965, the Committee approved the continuation of  covert tactical

                        and a sustained effort to modify and cut back whenever possible.On 26 November 1965, the Committee approved a request for  to meet existing and potential

                        both African and European. continuing efforts

                        near future assume most of the duties now carried out by . This would make possible a

                        aircraft are 29 pilots  who

                        other three, Americans.The  air operation

                        continuing effort.(3)FundingOf the  supplemental

                        1965 to meet the continuing political crisis in the Congo,  has been expended in

                        paymentof having

                        where  providing

                        level of  per

                        Presidents Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1Washington,.Mac:for

                        billpeanuts.The air force () is

declassified]) for use through 30 June and tellthem to cut back to no more than  for the second half

62171);2B. Dir 45581 (Out 66823).31. Full approval for 

 would

                        the Gizenga forces. 6. No action is to be taken, prior to the opening of Parliament, which could

                        envisaged as aid 

                        T28s for him. authorizeMcBrideto use this as a

                        political situation in the Congo.3. U.S. Personnel in Stanleyville:A. Nineteen  have

                        four bases (Lisala, Bukava, Kamina, and Leopoldville), and  non-American

                        assistance  which

                        contained Department telegram 958.2Sending appropriate  insure grounding T28s and

, exclusive of

                        the Central Intelligence Agency1,.0398. Ref A. 0372 [less than 1 line not

                        Katanga. 3. Ref B confusing. Should read original source [name not

                        to expend funds both to bribe 

                        in Contel 420 were, if not correct, at least prophetic.  other Consulate officers have

                        the Central Intelligence Agency1,.0372. Ref: Dir 24302 (Out 71507).21.Lumumbafate is best kept secret

3. Sole recent negative report is that of [less than 1 line

                        plant as  met  while dining with 5which perhaps also plant.4. Have avoided direct questioning [cryptonym not

                        forces cut off 

                        up to  dollars in

                        operations. These funds to provide military support for 2ops (purchase of arms, commo

                        civilian personnel. Sum authorized is in addition to  expenditures already authorized for

                        (and other  leaders at

                        authority is for 

                        the Central Intelligence Agency1,.0370. Ref: Leop 0785 (In 43482).2 has collected

                        Intelligence Agency (Bissell)1Washington,.SUBJECTSummary of 

                        16 March, Cairo, . This

. [Mobutu] commented How can you expect us

                        they found in his predecessor.B.  told  told [COS] night 12 April he overheard phone

                        vis--visODYOKEand other  will advise.8. Above forKUBARKbackground on Congo

                        this connection see  Leop

                        requested one millionBCF said [Identity 2] and [Identity 3] have decided make all-out

                        and thus  stand good

                        1, Folder 10, 

                        that he and other 

 understand reasons behindODYOKEactions, i.e., thatODYOKEdid not wish an unfriendly and pro

                        he and most  strongly

                        assurance from  could suspect such change

                        factODYOKEfully aware  preferred [Timberlake].B. Conservative congressional leaders have expressed approval ofTshombeand have been critical of

                        money, if the  were

                        generations.C. Fully concur para 1C Ref A.8. Leop looking forward receipt materials re civic action. Per 4would appreciate any written material

                        areas. Wish take advantageKUBARKexperience elsewhere in order avoid as many mistakes as possible.9.  care. Have tried achieve

                        and  said 20 April that

 said he believes

                        censure motion and may well fall. However,  and 5for reports predicting

                        leaders, etc.)B. Possibility opposition may submit censure vote against  would require large

                        such as  or one of their

                        force is keepANCout of politics.4. . Presume [Gullion] will soon briefODYOKEcontingency plan so [Identity 2] able explain more lucidly to

                        points contained in our message from Leopoldville:2a. Our Station Chief saw  on 23

                        sent by the latter to the Department through his own channel.)c. In addition to Gizengas pressures to obtain key jobs,  said that the Stanleyville representatives

                        circumstances,  asked our

                        concessions.  expressed the

                        seen.)d.  was also much concerned

                        try to physically eliminateKasavubu,Adoula,BombokoandMobutu, and possibly others.  said thatMobutuhad been asked to select forty-odd

                        the other evening, we will certainly do something to respond to  request for the training of

                        of instruction than the Congolese.)e. The final point was  request

                        (see )2are oppositionist, or at least

                        continued bribing and therefore welcomed proposals for creation sound  base. At same time, Leop

 agreed completely, and

                        approval pass  to

 but to Leop it

                        stirred into action. To support their efforts a total of  francs has been passed to influence key

Agency1Leopoldville,.SUBJECT/Suggested  Program for

                        that a cable be sent instructing to give its 30-day

Kidnapping of MoiseTshombe1. ( comment:  and 2reported that the kidnapping of

                        stated that the operation had its origin some months ago.  however, did not volunteer any details

declassified] collaboration with the Algerians.3.  also stated that an

                        assassination of its leaders.4. Although  tended to minimize

                        kidnapping.  stated that the

                        current predicament.  however remarked that all of

                        Congolese remaining in Spain were under close surveillance.35.  dissem: State

                        groups.D. Attempt infiltrate govt withKUBARKcontrolled assets such as  to

                        character.B.  reported thatLumumbaplanned to visitUSSRimmediately after conclusion of his

                        alienating him if he learns of our support to other leaders. seem more attractive than

                        political candidates. Also, 

                        suggest that consideration also be given to possible assistance to  who is fighting against the

                        Brussels considers2.b. LeopoldvilleWhatever action we might undertake, now or at a later date, in the internal

                        either  has always

March).3In addition,  has often tried to minimize to

                        covert support to  and

                        State for African Affairs that a contingency fund of  be established, from which covert

                        support for  selected moderate

                        discussion is based on the fact that you are considered to be on a  with a 2 hour

                        teletype. These messages will include instructions as follows:A.  (to be

                        H-Hour.B.  (to be

                        decision 13 August 1964, approving covert aid at a level of  to support the Congo

 decision to withold

                         told [COS] that [Godley] now believes it would be advisable for [COS] to be recalled to mark [USG] displeasure with [Mobutu]. While Station disappointed by

                        Station otherwise, Kinshasa would immediately so adviseHQS.6. Paras 14 above shown to  in

                        of a budgetary cut.2. Station has discussed above thinking with  payments to [Mobutu]. Just prior his departure

                        by having  funds cut off.

                        in future discussions of 

1 were present for

                        unclear on some of the ordnance required, and he requested  to prepare a detailed shopping

                        endeavoring mold political events. Per ref A it was predictable that  would go all out to

                        situation whereby there is odds on chance  and many of their

                        them. Thus they are determined to build a counter force.B. Counter forces originally intended to limit  should be able play active role in any

                        hands-off position, 

                        tactics from other .3. On basis above, Leop believes that hadKUBARKmounted political action ops, it would have been

                        should  gain control of

                        action program. The program should have two phases:A. As first step would increase regular payments to , [Identity 3], [Mobutu], [Identity 4].

                        in direction ruthless authoritarian regime. Believe , despite their real fear of

declassified] have been taught that there is some limit toODYOKEpatience.2. However, it is clear that Station relations with  would have been strained even without

declassified] activity.3. In any contacts with 

.4. Suggest that [COS] after discussion with

                        for  group as appropriate

                        to  party effort.

                        his house , with

                        support sizeable counter-action program within army. As we know from  reports, some officers

                        supply dissidents in Orientale SovietUNdelegateZorintold  December that US

                        has been declaredPNG.We were approached by Senator Bamba directly late last week  in an effort to

                        government or, at the very least, to adopt a neutral attitude toward theGDRC.(2)Adoulaadvised  that representatives of various

1Mr. John Waller and Mr. 

                        pol section chief, . [Godley] asked [COS] to

                        actions by  activists.

 be made

 contacts,

                        recommendation that 

    declassified]1. On 8 March 1967 the 303 Committee directed that Project  be liquidated as soon as possible

, the maintenance

                        Congolese Air Force.2. Before Project  was in

 be extended for the

                        Project .Archibald B.

                        nations providing support to the rebels.d. e. f. Initiation of large scale social, economic, and cultural programs in the

3] and .

                        Committee (in February 1966) was that each month he asked for funds () and that once the

4] should then be encouraged to appoint member  group as temporary Prime

, and [Identity

                        from  to Mr.Lawrence Devlin, AF Division

declassified] and delivered to Mr.Devlinin New York on the evening of 17 July 1964.  instructions are to deliver

                        support his government can expect in those countries.4.  Recent reporting shows

                        immediate future. For this reason, I recommend against  being given an appointment with the

                        established and maintained. 

 proposal that Mr.Devlinmeet with him,Mobutuand possibly others be accepted and

                        location. Tshombes isolation from African leaders,

                        conjecture that what  andTshombemay be seeking is a

                        Alternatively, if such a statement is not forthcoming, it may be that  will want some indication fromCIAas to whom he should back to obtain

                        conference the Ambassador raised withTshombethe question of aTshombe

 lunch alone with him at

                        misunderstanding  was ushered

                        ambitions.4.  thankedTshombefor his frank statement, adding

                        himself in opposition to all repeat all efforts to divide the Congo.  emphasized that his actions

                        sought this meeting with 

 past activities. However,

                        candid manner)  avoided

                        seeking honest reconciliation withGOC.6.  replied it regrettable that

 notedStruelenshad indicatedTshombesuspected [name

                        that he fully reassured re 

                        Minister.  again reassuredTshombethat U.S. policy is as

                        divergent policies between Washington and U.S. Embassy,  repeated there only one Congo policy, and

 thatAdoulafinished politically.TshombesaidAdoulas only hope was to cooperate withTshombe, that he,Tshombe, could and would helpAdoularetain some position influence ifAdoulaplayed game.Tshombeconcluded comments this point

                        opponent.10.  took advantage ref toAdoulato say he,  had many friends or contacts

                        referred to fact that  had

 objectives

                        repeated his desire for intel andCIsupport.13.Godleyjoined  after foregoing discussed and his report

 request for [formerCOS] presence follow by separate

                        62  began voicing fear

                        lead to failure  effort

                        to avoid chaotic political situation and failure  objectives (which they believed would

                        suspicious other .

                        camp for , to permit

 had no long-termplan and thus decided they had no

5].4.  remain without firm

                        able solve Congo security problem. Only political plans  able suggest were continued supportRADECO, together with parallel

                        clear  convincedRADECOstands little or no chance under

                        indirectly the 

                        However,  would prefer

 estimate of political power factors,

                        presidency.F. Despite foregoing, 

                        might lead toCNLtakeover.G. At present  at

Agency1Leopoldville,.0452 (In 15279).5. During course meeting with [Mobutu] on 7 Dec, [COS] asked

                        also try see . However, [Mobutu] called [COS] morning 9 Dec saying he most disappointed statements by

                        dealing with 

                        solution. Effort force through interim solution not acceptable key  leaders might result in

                        Station does not believe it advisable risk stirring up intramural  fight to try accomplish

                        in early days when his chances were slim indeed. Some  leaders realize they would be

                        out of house by Congolese. 

                        proceeding with these plans.TA

                        short, .UNcontrol army would play into hands 4program will have little if any

                        believe he must form civilian goon squads to counter pro- operation

                        action in near future would probably return 6forces would definitely undermine

                        initiative our 7policy will fail and

                        since early November.A.  who had been

 28 November

                        and had not seen him for a week. CharacterizedLumumbaas in disturbed personal condition.  saysLumumbablamed his remaining on so long in

                        support of this goal.1. On 26 November, 

                        contacted 

                        of commerce. When employed QJWIN told he would be paid per month for period one or maximum two months. IfHQSconcurs he go Stan. Recommend

                        situation and major economic problems facing the govt. Other 5have been less specific in their comments but it is

                        support.b. c. d. Endeavor to organize in support of theAdoulaGovernment significant mass organizations, .e. f. Assist GeneralMobutu, moderate

                        up to  be granted for

                        he paid off byTshombe.3. Recognize this is unusual request by view importance to  ops of maintaining  from  for passage  authorization to retain

                        the face of much difficulty.1. 2.Formation ofAdoula-led cartel leading to eventual formation of a

33. 4. 5.Assist Mobotu to retain the loyalty of key

                        noses  and repsin fact thatODYOKEaid not receiving adequate publicity.8. Although recognizeODYOKEcan never

                        extension ofCIAsupport . This memorandum is attached as

                        authorized  program and

                        its probably not vital.The biggest risk is further charges of makingTshombea US puppet if Africans find out.  Wed also have to be careful not to

                        would agree to a 

Agency1Leopoldville,.6705 (In 71125). 1. At his urgent invitation, 

                        renewed plea for  electoral program. They

                        used on previous occasions, thatODYOKEunwilling subsidize one good Congolese leader against another and that  role is to bring

                        most useful.6. During the discussion with Gov.HarrimanI expressed grave misgivings concerning the outcome

 the

                        cable  (In 67046). At this

                        since independence.Mobutuand  have become accustomed to and

                        of the 

1 line not declassified] operations in the Congo, .4. Thus it is our conviction that such a termination would have serious

                        according to resistance capability shown by rebels as he advances.  will be joined

                        etc.b. We have sent  to

                        support  which

line not declassified] obtaining foreign ground crews . I explained that this was

                        not be avoided .

                        Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms)1Washington,.SUBJECT Project

                        Project has operated have also been overtaken by events.2. The members of the 

                        been able to redirect its operations in consonance with these guidances.7. The objective of this project is quite separate from project  which is designed to cope

 project, on the

                        of the  group and other

                        Leopoldville.8. It is recommended that Africa Division be authorized to expend up to  of the  earmarked for  in the African Division

Agency1Leopoldville,.SUBJECT Letter for

                        to the Station in Leopoldville1Washington,.SUBJECTPolitical Action in the CongoReference:DIR36265.21. This dispatch is meant not so much to enlighten the field as to the

                        cohesion of the .

                        any, are not significant.4. In our talks with the ,

                        provinces.2. 3. However, we have reservations concerning the extent to which the Belgians

                        option of withdrawing our support, yielding to Belgian influence, .5. As reported in [less than 1 line not

 to enableEnguluto visit all provincial presidents

    in formation of a national political party:B. Expansion of the successful public relations program which has

    continued support toAdoula.Total Funds Requested4.CoordinationThe Chief of Mission and our Chief of Station, Leopoldville feel strongly

                        of a  Senator to

the

declassified] who could be useful.Mr.Merchantcommented that  in Black Africa is

                        of  to carry out any

not declassified].1.  Latter reported

                        home since just afterKasavubuspeech night 5 September. 

                        handsLumumba.B. Mobutushowed him written order fromLumumbaordering him have army

                        declassified].F.  said nine

                        following:A.  try get

                        world opinion.C. Get  leaders on

1] said will be done soon asIleogovernment installed office by President.  ToCOScomment thatLumumbain opposition is almost as dangerous as in office,

program.3Also said he sureODYOKEprepared help with technicians as needed.3.  If opposition fails its

                        up to  view fact

                        an estimated  forFY1965.b.Pertinent U.S. Policy ConsiderationsIt is U.S. policy to support the present Congolese Government in its efforts

                        that government. 

                        Support aircraft are overtly leased by the Congolese Government . While these cover

                        Belgians than previously.g.Fundingh.Support Required by Other AgenciesThe Department of Defense has provided strong support since the outset of the

                        gaps not covered by  orGDRCand providing covert assets to

declassified] be funded as separate project as are 4and .5Marops,  and  are direct paramilitary

                        expended  efforts to build

 must agree not to tell

                        would know of it and would continue to work with  group to try ensure groups continued

                        the Congo Government. At present this support includes furnishing  pilots and ground

                        aircraft fromCIAcontingency force  have been ordered

                        Leopoldville by U.S. contract personnel withUSAFmarkings with stops at Takhli, Ganis, and Aden. The  operational pilots

                        to have a minimum number of ground U.S. contract technicians where no  are available. In

                        officers . The

                        been called upon to 

attached)3a)  in the Bakongo area in the

not declassified]c)  in the Mongo Tribal region

e)  has support of the Bakongo

                        Leopoldville. f) , aCNLleftist presently in theTshombegovernment who has good support in Luluabourg in

                        west. Station would establish contact.g) , former Defense Minister,

                        the Uganda border.j) k) l) (3) [sic] Psychological:CIAplans certain specific initiatives in

                        that the Agency . Any

                        and .1. [formerCOS] remaining Leop. Will try

 11 Aug and seeing him

                        interests. However, will push as hard as possible 12 Aug meeting.2. In brief meeting 11 Aug 

                        Leop.D.  returning , 14 Aug. Will

 has been

                        and cross currents among 

 group, citingODACIDbasic opposition to

                        continuing pressure fromODACIDto  parliament,

                        controlled by  with

                        served the purpose. 3.Re[Godley]. [Embassy] reporting describes fully [Godley] activity in passing on word to

 candidly  Leop

                        Baxwnga 3Congo Republic. Subj: ex-premierPatrice Lumumbatransferred from Thysville Military camp to

                        61. Source:  (B)

Agency1Leopoldville,.0625 (In 30010).1. 2situation deteriorating rapidly. Troops

                        letting matters drift and facing certain failure 4objectives. Station concurs.3.COSand Ambassador seeing  leaders to get reading. This message

                        spell during which time we might aidMobutuand 

                        discipline in theCNA.3. In view of the above,  that the US is prepared in principle to

                        supply additional funds to 

                        undetermined amount of money be pledged in principle to  orMobutufor troop payment. Certain provisions and demands

                        anticipated).(D) To request  to

                        Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Tweedy)1Leopoldville,.SUBJECTOperational/[cryptonym not

                        1963. As Headquarters is aware, the Station has been pushing the  to establish a strong

Agency1Leopoldville,.6155 (In 77386). Ref Dir 20038.21. Leop and  have discussed

                        Following concensus:2.  do not constitute team

                        susceptible to undesirable advice (which subj separate cable).33. Per ,4general

 party with large

                        across-board success of 

Agency1Leopoldville,.5576 (In 41537). Ref: A. Leop 5558 (In 41007);2B. Leop 5566 (In 40682).31.  [COS] met with [Mobutu]4night 27 Dec. [Mobutu] appeared be

                        pending passage resolution creating Moyen Congo and high court. .Ananylater phoned [Mobutu] [4 lines not

                        speech  promising

                        fundamental law. 4. Although [COS] in process of moving will

                        maintained. However, 

                        At that time a strong and decisive leadership will be necessary and  does not seem be

                        above facts. However at 28 Dec meeting team decided continue backing . This based on personal

                        that dropping  at this

                        constitutionality 

 work together

                        action against  until

                        closed  will be almost

                        needed maintain him in office.)3. Leop trying develop  but do

                        take over 

                        making any recommendationmerelyraising the question. Mr. 

 plan to prolong

                        basis opposition and 

                        continue do so unless advised to contrary.) As for  their views provide more solid intel

                        previous position that the 206 or a similar aircraft could replace the T28.Devlinnoted that the  pilots as well as

                        should be requested to approve a contingency fund of  for use in maintaining a political

                        individual toTshombe. The subject of a contingency fund was raised next by Mr. McElhiney who stated

                        as soon as possible. This is an old story and sheerest nonsense. The fact isTshombewants us to back him

                        Council.B.  two Soviet

                        18 September. 

4. Agree position outlined last sentence reference which we assume is fully

 to which such

                        transferred .

                        with  as opposed to

                        toward  in fact have taken

                        year ago, when  were

                        has largely stolen 

                        review entire  program

                        about  project as well.3. Queried  today re

                        suspicion.  advises he

                        the  crews,

 crews that

                        Congo  crews will

                        reduction of 

not declassified] pilots have been returned to .F. We believe that the U.S. will have to provide funds to maintain the

                        aircraft, the 

                        followed plan outlined para five ref.2.  welcomed [COS] back to Congo and immediately asked how

                        betweenTshombeon one hand andKasavubuand  on other. Such split which now

                        to work withKasavubuand the , some of his

                        vein  he had carefully

declassified] and that he was convinced that an entente between theKasavubuand  andTshombewas both feasible and desirable.

                        of the  to the

                        dealings withTshombe.  it would be

                        stories that had circulated that he was in the Congo to support the  and denied

                        governor had authorized this.)6.  and [COS] hit hard on the consequences which would

                        from resigning.  the fact

                        resign.7.  stated he was delighted

                        contacts with  as often as is

 interest had never once

                        . It is

                     routinely undertaken to the point where they become conspicuous. However, . Therefore,

                     relocated without entailing serious risks to US security interests.I believe the impact of relocationthe financial costs,  and the

                     telecommunications plan.2 (The

                        line of source text not declassified] at our naval  commo base at

                     the U.S. seems his best remaining bet.He probably wont expect you to take him up on this, but the offer

                     (over $70 million at the peak)  and is

were present for Item

                        AFandCIAproposals

                     guerrilla warfare in Angola in 1961.CIAfirst proposed major assistance toRobertoin March 1962, . The

                        

                        .

                     Director of the Bureau (Hughes)1Washington,.SUBJECTAFMeeting withCIARepresentatives January 18, 1966PARTICIPANTSAFMr.Fredericksand AmbassadorTrimble; AFWMr.Clark;AFCMr. Brown;CIA;INR/DDCAmbassador Koren and

                        

                     Presidents Special Assistant (Rostow)1Washington,.SUBJECTAlgerianPL480 AgreementHelmsmentioned Monday mainly wanted

                        present for Item 1  was

                     division of the unified Zambia-Rhodesian Railroad system;  (e)PMSmiths desire to meet withPMWilsonin London.On a recent African tour, Bottomley was disturbed to find deep concern among

                     African ports, and (iii) .TheJCScomment points to the need, to which we

                     Portuguese punitive incursions into the Congo. Mr.Ruskfelt that ifAdoula

                     Robertos long-term stayability as a leader. Mr.Bundyrestated the problem by saying

                     with an approach toAdoula with

                     of instruction in considerable detail would be issued to Ambassadors  and

                     steps for covert discussions and support could be initiated.Mr.Rusksuggested that  the

                        

                     than originally estimated.3. 4.Congo:The Director made reference to the apparent

                     brigades and the commissioner of police might be engineering a move to oustNkrumahduring his Asian tour.1.  The

                     following examples. 1 May

                     which apparently put a stop to the plotting for the time being. 28

                     police officers were involved.The latest report, which tied the coup plans toNkrumahs trip abroad, was printed  on 23 February

planning to use  to get across indirectly

a different location under complete Pakistani control.The  Peshawar [less

targets in . This

States-operated facility, 

notice with little intelligence loss if need be.To refresh your memory, they recommended we: (a) increase existing 

that what they are negotiating hard about concerns legitimatePakinterests in the installations; . This is

U.S.  installations in

in at a later date, and it might be read as an admission that 

reliability of our ally were few and far between. He suggested .f. AdmiralRabornstated that

toGOPcapabilities .3. Pursuant to conversation with Ayub will be talking next week both to

supplies.6) With respect to the three questions the Indians have put to us3and which have now become public knowledge,George Ballwill brief Greenfield on the following line:

Pakistan more than India, but ought to be symmetrical.4. 5. Last, I'dauthorize Freeman to tell the Indians that

installation in West China which has come to us from  and other

may be some kind of understanding with us.The question I may add goes beyond this particular point.  If we

facilities at Peshawar, Pakistan (which represent  of our

for the reopening of our two Atomic Energy Detection Stations ; and in

temporary basis but rather for indefinite period. I noted that 

    declassified].(C) (D) He wanted full and unlimited access to every sector Peshawar

blanket clearance for any person who might be designated by 

    than 1 line of source text not declassified].  This

Embtel 1271.41. We share your view reflected para 1 Ref A thatSukendroapproach  surrounded

link at political level as proposed para 5 Ref D.4. Following thoughts, in addition to questions noted Ref A, suggested bySukendroapproach:A. 

friendships.4. 5. The Army's relations with State have not been extensive. The Army has

covert and has therefore the same major political drawback. 8. Looking beyond its current campaign against thePKI, the Army is undoubtedly aware of the

an insurgency situation in Indonesia. Present were Mr.Cuthell, his deputy Mr.Underhill, State's Indonesiandesk officer Mr.Goodspeed, Mr. 

a military officer in Indonesia with communications expertise, 

small arms to assist the Army in dealing withPKIdissidence during the next few months. AsSukendro's request was stated in somewhat vague

might wish to give the Indonesian Army.

covert assistance become large.

in the Philippines and probably as many dependents.  a Peace

endangering their livelihood and personal security.  continues to

context of the basic mission program and as a supplement thereto, 

advent of better times. Within this framework the  covert

    1965PARTICIPANTSMessrs.Berger,CuthellandMooreforFEMessrs.Colby,  forCIAMessrs.CooperandThomsonfor WHMr. Stuart forINR/DDCIndonesiaThe meeting was called for the purpose of discussing the latest

    source text not declassified] which were held in 

a practical way of the actions of the Indonesian Army. The 

the State Department's Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs.There are some risks in the delivery of this equipment, but  with

regard.The cost of the requested equipment is approximately . The

given to them covertly and as rapidly as possible.a. Origin of the RequirementThe various requirements for communications equipment came 

that pertaining to shipment of the requested equipment.  A covert

to be on the basis of covert procurement and delivery  from which

small sum proposed will help considerably.C. 

Defense Secretary.In closing I invited him visit Enterprise next time it in, perhaps Jan,

sympathetic to American objectives.2

draft memorandum. However, they do not consider that Indonesian 

through ,

    

establishment of the network as may prove necessary.g. Funding: The overall cost of the additional increment of 

    declassified]. These funds are available .2. ProblemTo counter the growing strength and influence of the Communist Party of

deriving from Country Team cooperation in the field.g. Timing of the Operation

not all wedded to this philosophy ofSukarnoandSubandrio. In this respect he mentioned 

reports were excellent, he was deeply appreciative, and 

required.3. 4. [less than 1 line of source text not

developments during the trip may be of special interest to us and 

evidence  thatPKIitself already regarded its

several key officers. In this Embassy, none of whom have talked toAPor anyone else about this.2.  has, with my

Laos. 

more training? AmbassadorMartinexplained that the Border Patrol Police is an effective unit, .Mr. Bundy asked about intelligence collection in these areas, whether it

    B. As I have reported several times, the Thai simply do not believe that

        declassified]; Mr. Stuart forINR/DDC; and Mr. Underhill ofEAfor Indonesia itemThailand

    source text not declassified] account for it?

    declassified] the Embassy in the person of  had access

coaxed to act in their own best interests.

discussion of the situation. If PrinceSihanoukhad any suggestions on this,  would be

examined the airgrams,CASreport 

frontier.CASreport  of October

Embassy staff,AID. I also

in the Vietnam police and political action team programs. Further ThoughtsAside from the police program, there are two other,

commitment made, and we recognize the skill with which 

informed along lines outlined para 8 your message August 15.5Re increments set forth above, you may if you wish point out 

neurotic fantasies and logically reasoned arguments,  has put in question

be fully exposed with enormous recovery to the Treasury. 

    not declassified] is completely honest, so much so that 

    text not declassified] fully reciprocates, believing 

    not declassified], which he is not. And while 

assistance never be known. This is the reason why  are so

    source text not declassified] has always opposed this, .But we now have the Constitution. The elections will have to be held. It

had taken place the day before involving I gathered, . At that

    text not declassified] were witting of this matter.

would expect some concrete benefit from any contribution they made. 

funds would have to be found from other sources.

    source text not declassified]. As far as  himself is

could not get very specific answers to my questions,  left me with

in-country production for the urban market.

or certainly to engage in any controversy.

colonel, is also a fully functioning civil servant.

group would be exploited by the Communists. Otherwise, 

navigated some new directions might be tried.Returning to the matter of a US contribution I told  that this

earlier explicitly promised the availability of funds up to 

background from Graham as to the original intentions  as far as he

government party. (I am, of course, aware also that  is

    source text not declassified] was, through , collecting

    of source text not declassified] could not help but knowof our help, that 

candidates who were opposing candidates supported by ? Mr.Hannahconceded that this

were dissents, he wanted them clearly stated.Ambassador Brown was given the assignment of finding out whether 

    declassified] should be aware of the US assistance.

advisable, then he suggested that I talk directly with 

    not declassified] would also be informed.  felt that in

    declassified] role should be at least secondary.

ample income and he should not be greedy for more.  was

his participation in the government refinery which  said 

has failed to date. In spite of all of this, however,  said that

    declassified] I found his suggestion about approaching 

minimum the word that I hoped Mr.Hannahwould be bringing back. I said to 

faction in the government party against another. Again 

diversion. Without giving me any specific information  again said

    declassified] said.

    text not declassified] return to the country. Specifically 

conditions about elections in return for our assistance. 

    (Bundy)1Washington,.SUBJECTThe Week in Asia

Bangkok later in the month. AmbassadorMartinindicated that he felt he could respond 

general parliamentary elections will be held in Thailand. AmbassadorMartinhas proposed 

experience indicates that the cost would be at least . Such a

made available is a vulnerability which will be minimized . This

which recommends approval.2b. Host Country[1 paragraph (21/2 lines of source text) not

1966. These Thai politicians wanted approximately  US dollars

agreement in principle for support of the Thai election.Mr. Bundy said that he felt that it might be worth  dollars to

 repeated lower level

we surely have no certainty of united action among such figures as 

refrained from any relating of this to the assistance question.) 

be interested if an opportunity was offered. While I think 

earlier requested would soon be in order.

previously held with Americans. He emphasized that  and other

was talking about a government-wide party including  and he was

    declassified] whether he had any suspicions about 

corruption in government and the usefultool this provided the Communist propaganda, 

government under the Constitution. I made clear to  that my

division were very clear to them. I remarked that I did not believe 

and the formation of a government under the Constitution.

Thai matters and even ask to run the show. Nevertheless, 

some quid-pro-quo for any assistance rendered. On the other hand, 

projects up for detailed examination and approval,  said.I replied that my government would have no intention of running the

might be usefully adapted to Thailand's circumstances. 

posture be absolutely correct.) In this connection again, 

second thought he believed I should mention our conversation to 

states that it would be worthwhile to follow up on the channel toSihanoukwhich 

    Secretary of State, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

that  has

control and direction of the Department of State.The discussion focused on the proposed letter from  to PrinceSihanouk.2[less than 1

    line of source text not declassified] repeatedSihanouk's comment to him that 

    declassified] opinion onSihanouk's view of Communist China.  replied thatSihanouklooks upon Peiping

    source text not declassified] this will be the first time 

assassination thinking this might give ideas to his own enemies,  one of

    1967Thailand

our approval ofThanom.Mr.Bergersuggested that .Mr.Bergernoted that one of the

why would Praphat or Dawee want to get rid of him?  said that he

     and

thinkNe Windoes. This is a complex and sensitive subject. If he raises it, which I doubt,

GeneralKouprasith Abhay,  and anSVNmilitary intelligence officer to

    b.Anti-Infiltration Tactics: The plan to raise

    

this authorization and suggested, instead, that Lao  pilots be

responsibilities agreed upon for follow-up actions.(1) (2) It was considered that intelligence emanating from Kha operations in

and as a logical extension of present Prairie Fire operations.3.  He

in the area. (Action:FE

    

    Panhandle.2[Here follows the Discussion section of this estimate, comprising 6

suppressive strike.3) Suggestions outlined above for corridor operations clearly do not meet

unattainable, even though the agreement provided it. The President then asked where we were going, or was this a day-to-day

that the use of US civilian pilots inT28's (c. above) is not necessary provided that. However,

village defense and guerrilla activities against the Pathet Lao. 3. Certain ofCINCPAC's operations

as part of a larger Allied military effort.4.  theRTASpecial Forces could be used as

areas. A

scheduled daily; and close collaboration was established  to

supplemental appropriations for this purpose in the amount of 

Tabs I and II,3respectively.ConclusionsParamilitary forces being aided by the U.S. covertly in Laos  are

    Site 85, as of 9 March 1968ACQLaos, VientianeSOURCE

better feel for the situation in Laos. (2) Continue to build upT28strike capability and use Lao and 

operational area; second, the launching of operations ; and third,

these objectives. During the past year roadwatch team effort 

Meo managerial middle class), and police administrative services . In the

declassified].3. Judgment here is that overcoming Thai reluctance to permit 

however, by air support provided by Royal Lao Air Force T28s,  andUSAFaircraft operating out of

situation around Muong Kheung-Ban An-Muong Soui and asked forT28strikes in area. I told him  to do

communications, to a counter-insurgency command center in Saigon, .

technicians hired individually byRLG. Aircraft

time. 

							modernization of existing units and improvement of base facilities.

							given to the problem of providing additional protection for our 

								We're worried lest we be over-identified with yet another repressive

								Agency1,.TDCSDB315/0142268Country: South KoreaDOI: 1820 April 1968Subject: President Pak's Critical Reaction to the Honolulu ConferenceACQ: Source: [5 lines of source text not

							not consider sending additionalROKcombat troops to Vietnam in the foreseeable future. ( implied that

							longer rely on the U.S. for long-range military assistance.5.  said

							domestic redtape and opposition toROKmilitary aid.6.  report

								Korea.3 Present

							of the police. said

							intensified effort next Spring.4

							the Korean armed forces at all of these developments.5Mr.Fleckquestioned 

								declassified]2NKside has shown no effort to cooperate, in

							restraint our air alone is exercising. He suggested .Before coming out here I discussed with you the strategic importance of

							philosophy accentuated by our secret talks withNKat Panmunjom. You will see, I trust, AmEmb's and 

							more troops to assist the South Vietnamese.

									BergerCIADirectorHelmsWalt RostowClark CliffordGeorge ChristianPrior to the beginning of the meeting,George

								Is it feasible to reduce the margin of uncertainty about North Korean

								lines of source text not declassified].3

							Korea, some by land, others by sea.In response to inquiries by Mr.Bundy, 

							also occurred in other cities.

                        attack are quite specific, and they seem to carry the inference ofGRCparticipation.7.  the

                        1937, and expecting developments to take a similar course . This also suggests to us

line not declassified]AttachmentSUBJECTMemorandum of Conversation Between AmbassadorMcConaughyandChiang

                        and indirectly from me in November.3He has clearly stated 

                        plans would be expected from me.10. Comment:GRChas recently given .CCKhas made strong on-the-record statements in

                        A Military Appraisal of Chinese Acquisition of Nuclear Weapons.(2) e. Specific military courses of action to implement the concepts outlined in

                        will conduct political correspondence with Tibetan refugee groups  to

                        facilities for their education.The Agency is supporting the establishment of Tibet Houses in 

                        can be summarized in approximate figures as follows:a. Support of 2100 Tibetan guerrillas based in Nepal$ 500,000b. Subsidy to the Dalai Lama$ 180,000c. 

                        has been coordinated with the Department of Defense and the  as

                        mainland China in this crisis.It is written by Bill Wells, an imaginative, scholarly, boldCIAman in Hong Kong.WaltAttachmentFollowing is the text of aCIAreport 

memo.)412. ProposedGRCAttack on the Mainland renewed discussion

                        not be used to supportGRCforces. 

                        principles and trends.5.CCKtoday discussed with 

                        instrumentation sites at appropriate locations is underway.  the

                        air-cooled reactor at Pao-t'ou. As of September 1963, . Construction

                        indicated that major construction at the siteincluding service roads,  and

line of source text not declassified]broadcasts  from a 50

                        of its effect.e. In answer to a question from Mr.Vance, Mr. Colby briefly summarized collection problems  since the

                        disinclination to see us involved inGRC-ChiComcontacts. will nevertheless proceed get into

                        cooperation in intelligence planning and operations.8. 

                        present cautious wait and see approach to mainland events. We also know 

                        major military action against mainland at this time we know, 

                        would be willing to risk everything on a rash and vengeful act. 

Chinato theDepartment of State1Taipei,.1517. For Assistant SecretaryBundy.1. I want you to know of some of theGRCatmospherics here on matters other thanUNitems, which may or may not be further reflections of stiffening overallGRCmood. MinisterChiang Ching-kuohas been giving 

                        cancelled a pre-existing joint maritime program, and MinisterChianghas been unavailable to  in the last

                        starchiness we are now experiencing from PresidentChiang, or isessentially Chiang Ching-kuo-inspired pressures on  in

                        of source text not declassified] termination. Presumably when 

                        ofUNsituation.8.Ray Clineand  have seen this

not declassified].2,

                        believe that certain responsibleGRCofficials doubt the efficacy of such incursion attempts.4. 

                        forces.Credibility of our nuclear deterrent might be improved by deploying to 

(Limdis).41. 

                        continue to function 

                        sensitivity occasioned by the presence of the Tibetan force  it

                        declassified] have not been successful because of Chinese 

                        teams, the paramilitary resistance force, and the support mechanism 

                        number and in value during the past few years.e. Activities designed to develop a dynamic political program  to

                        challenge the Communist efforts inside Tibet.4. Significant Previous 303 Committee Approvalsa. September 1958initial endorsement ofCIAcovert support to Tibetan resistance;b. 20 May 1959initial approval of covert support to the Dalai Lama;c. 14 February 1961endorsed continuation of the covert program;d. 13 December 1962approved training of Tibetan guerrilla force;e. 20 February 1964reviewed and endorsed continuation of covert program;f. 9 April 1965approved relocation of Tibetan paramilitary force;g. 8 July and 25 November 1966endorsed the covert paramilitary program .These landmark reviews were interspersed with status reports and briefings of

declassified].c. 6. Projected and Planned Programsa. On the political front during 1967, the Dalai Lama began what is hoped

                        and in the relegation of operational tasks to Tibetan assets. c. Some elements of the basic covert program remain to be implemented. They

                        information.6. 7. I reiterated request to discuss matter with Gimo at his conven-ience, and

                        U.S. 

    line of source text not declassified] received indications 

and 3which reported on

approved a request to provide a covert subsidy in the amount of  to take

     to

January 1964, theCIA discussed

possible date.2.Accomplishments:The first  provided [less

Bolivian Government. The requested funds are available within 

would point to the desirability of helping  at

    declassified] injection recently given 

listed below.2. Support for the Democratic FrontOn 19 December 1963 the Special Group approved a one-time payment 

    d.Miguel Moreno, the candidate of the small ultranationalist National Reformist

government which could pave the way for a socialist revolution. Morenoalso happens to be

    .

matter could easily be cleared up by talking with the Secretary.3, who made a recent trip to

economic field. reported that while in

would last only until December, clearly implying he expected more.  said he made it clear to

    Congressional Elections in Chile1. SummaryThis is a proposal to provide funds in the amount of  to

the Ambassador to Colombia (Oliver)1Washington,.Dear Covey:1. The primary reason for our decision against your proposal  was the

coincide with what was decided.3. I think that the purpose of your proposal was well taken, . I agree

1965, and  more to be

useful instrument for mobilizing peasant support. Of the 

 There will necessarily be

week, prior to its scheduled transmittal to your office on June 25.3In addition, 

    in Bolivia1. SummaryIt is proposed to provide in appropriate stages the total sum of .

individuals who would constitute his top command.(2) (3) Barrientos is a long standing friend of the United States. He

    declassified]Oduberhas been in touch withAFLCIOleaders. Oduberhas informed 

problems that this could bring.I do not think that we should choose sides to the extent of bankrollingOduber.  He knows

elections.(3) 2. Results of the Political Action ProgramThe objectives of this program have been accomplished. A new political

the same time covert financial assistance was given to 

    declassified] subsidy payment was made to  a second

would not abstain from elections, three other groups made 

place between the Barrientos coalition and five opposition slates.The combination of providing money and covert guidance to 

     The

    source text not declassified] in 1954 and  in 1965.aCIAphoto comparison analyst is of the

its last two and a half weeks. The sum requested was , and in view

    declassified] of this sum should be allocated to 

non-partisan defender of democratic institutions. Letter (of which 

is  transmitted

following action should be taken:(a) (b) Mr.Burtonwill explore the

declassified]2. Current Status This

lost their lives. Clean up operations are continuing.

subsequently to arrange for their interrogation by experienced 

or effective treatment by Bolivian soldiers.2. 

execution ofCheGuevara.2CIAhas also obtained  messages

theoretician Jules Debray was sent to Bolivia to contactCheGuevarain late February. He was arrested in March.

house. At one stage, a burst of shots was heard and  learned

least two occasions  had

     three times in his

campaign matters been discussed. He was concerned however at  thrashing around in a

impression  respected and

conversation with  seems

He would speak to  on

to  without comment some

have a low noise level. said he had always thought

    declassified] was a blabbermouth.Kingagreed, but pointed out the influence  has .Mannwanted to know how much money was

tell him  is talking.Mann's inclination is to back

off?The consensus of those present was in the affirmative. said the post had

they said  would do

        declassified] money.2) I will advise 

want it.Subsequent to the meetingPryceinformedKing,  and me thatHurwitchwill go to Chile immediately,

    Subject: Financial Support to Chilean Democratic Front 2B. Memorandum for The Special Group, dated 27 August 1962,

required.(7) (8) Some funds will also be utilized for specialized propaganda

visited byFrei's 

declassified], be passed covertly in a manner  to inferU.S. Government origin of the

of the Andes  a

support he needs.M: Yes, I agree with that.DCI: So that we will be . . . .M: If you have any other concrete ideas, youll let us know?DCI: Ill get  on the

    text not declassified] in Georgetown said that Jaganfound this to be the

strongest. Jaganmay have been

rendered academic.b. It was also apparent that the only visible candidate to support isBalaguer, . AmbassadorJohnsonmade the point thatBalaguerwas coming up in popularity

    Balaguer, president of the Partido Reformist (PR). The 303 Committee decided to 

    declassified]In sum, three kinds of support toBalaguerare envisioned: (1) funds to be provided ; (2)

organization lean and aggressive.3. ImplementationA. ExistingPRCampaign Machinery No

    b. Political BackgroundThe issues which divided the Dominican Republic at the outset of the

courses of action outlined in this paper at a cost of .32. ProblemTo prevent the election ofCheddi

the U.S. Government. He has requested financial support 

6 April 196123 May1963. 

courses of action are outlined in Tab C.h. Timing of the Operation For

organizing his absentee vote strength. IfBurnham's electoral prospects appeared bleak, . These

    .

        VanceCIAMr.William BroeMr.Desmond FitzGeraldMr. WHMr.W. W. RostowMr.William BowdlerAmbassadorCrimminsreviewed the

and offering quite inflammatory potential exists at the UASD. (

    Republic;Mr.  accompanied the

Intensify exchanges program to develop moderate leadership in thePR, thePRDand thePRSC.9. 10. Review labor program to see how it can be strengthened in order to

also concurs.6. RecommendationsIt is recommended that the 303 Committee approve the expenditure 

    .

Haitian situation will be reported by internal and external assets.  All

Community.c. 

suitable for use in the reconstruction period.d. 3. For the duration of the contingency close liaison would be maintained

in mutual defense against the threat posed byCheddi Jagan.2.  It

would continue to pose aserious threat to the government of independent Guyana. 

    Department of State1Georgetown, Please pass

Government. While

would be worse if he did, won, and then got tossed out.Later in the meeting there were murmurings about the  poll in the

Cerda's removal had brought on almost immediate transformation. 

that Cuba will be in very bad economic shape by the end of 1965. ; some of

that recent  contact

critical point in the race because of shortage of cash.  The

    declassified]5. RecommendationIt is requested that the 303 Committee authorize an additional 

the same criteria.2. 3. The flow of funds toBalaguershould be kept under close review by Mr.Gordonand Mr.FitzGeraldand such additional sums supplied as may be

of the potential voting population.The comparison with the March poll follows:March 1966May 1966Balaguer54.846.1Bosch19.234.83.05.2Other1.4Undecided21.613.9To the question: Whom do you expect to win?, the answer was:Bosch36.4Balaguer31.7Bonnelly1.5Don't know30.4

functions.B. C. Some of the more sophisticated radar and communications equipment we

    text not declassified].A. B. Cuba apparently is going to draft about 25,000 men a year for the next

million tonspossibly less.B.  the

reflected in the credit ratings the Cubans are getting.1. 2. Against this background, Cuba is becoming a much more attractive

    1965PARTICIPANTSARAMr.Vaughn, Mr.Adams, Mr. Thomas, Mr.Crockett, Mr.Shlaudeman;AgencyMr.FitzGerald, ;INR/DDCMr.CarterDominican Republic[2 paragraphs (6 lines of source text) not

takeBalaguer.  said this was also his position.Vaughnexpressed the opinion that

evacuation program.4. A message (copy attached)3has gone 

    line of source text not declassified] frequently 

over. ,

Communists did.5.  He

from theUSpoint of view, 

interests of the United States.

which recently traveled to the Dominican Republic.2. Mr.  was requested to

insurgency that had been agreed upon at the last meeting,3.3. In regard to the DNI it was explained that it was not possible to

    lines of source text not declassified] It was

expected momentarily.5. 6. While the meeting was in progress two Country Team reports arrived.

    1964PRESENTMr.Bundy, AmbassadorThompson, Mr. McNaughton, and Mr.McCone was present for Item 4 was present for Item 5[Omitted here is discussion of unrelated subjects.]3. Cuban ForecastThe paper Proposed Infiltration/Exfiltration Operations into Cuba during

be the case.  also

(Pena Gomez spoke atCaamanorally yesterday; all other speakers were from extreme left (

Aracheone of the leaders of the Dominican rebel command.7. 

present.VI. DisadvantagesDisadvantages might be:(a) ;(b) the creation of an organization with a will and capability to act

the elections in British Guiana would be held as scheduled. In his reply, the Foreign Secretary remarked that a Labor Government

that his Government would proceed with the elections as scheduled.  The

December elections under proportional representation to take place. 2. Appointment ofGreenwoodas

British Governments have shown an understanding of this situation  affording

been spent and it is estimated that an additional  will be

1969. Approval for the expenditure of this amount is recommended.5(The  are available [less than 1 line of source text not

    text not declassified] needed for FY 1969,  are

working to make sure that their adherents are properly registered.  The

of these may be supporters of thePNCand theUF.3. New Developments

    declassified] was committed in FY '67. Of the 

section chief, economic section chief, agriculture, , etc. Mr.Mannmentioned that 

confirm reports from several other sources few days before 

needed. has joined telecon along

    , under the

    decision.3(c)  will coordinate withAIDon a plan for the development of

Problems, theMPCA, thePNCUFCoalition, and U.S.U.K. Discussions, Security, and Coordination.]7. Future Plans

    As the proportional representation election which threatens to oust him

all  meetings [less than 1 line of source text not

    Secretary, EURRichard I. Philips, Director, P/ONWillis C. Armstrong, Director, BNA that

Security Affairs (Bundy)1Washington,.SUBJECTBritish Guiana1. On 21 May 1964 the Consul General in Georgetown  reported

co-operate with the pro-Jaganarbitration committee which has been set up to mediate the dispute. 

    text not declassified] advice in this matter. 

to make his own decision.h. 4. A copy of this memorandum is being sent to Mr.William C. Burdettof the Department of

President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1Washington,.SUBJECTBritish Guiana and Cuba1. 2there is a note of optimism inBGthese days, even among East Indians; 

seem to be getting along quite well with each other;  we can

duringGreenwood's visit toBG,3now scheduled for about February 1215.2. 3.BG Rice ExportsThere is a glut of rice inBGthese days and we are working [less than 1 line of source text not

Term1. The Secretary General of the United Nations,U

collection systems and sensors.The cost of the U.S. intelligence effort, as I have said, runs about 

    D/NROas reconnaissance was 

    than 1 line of source text not declassified], theU-2 operating from a carrier, the 

it appeared to be its primary and only interest. Hence, the 

the very ingenious system was presented which offered  with Corona

feasible and within the state of art and recommended approximately 

about  out of [less than 1 line of source text not

construction, assembly, testing, and contracting of a 

    RegardingNATOInvolvement

declassified]1. Archbishop Makarios will find it very difficult to accept the

State Department andCIAwhich was  sent to

    declassified]- operated through native instructors .j. We have more than tripled our intelligence efforts in South Vietnam.

operations, and even of experiments such as the forthcoming 

Dr.McMillan's statement to Dr.Landthat the 

    1 line of source text not declassified].Vancesaid that very possibly the 

years under Lockheed management and the introduction of 

changes in the SecretariatACQ (3

                        but it sees no alternative candidates. TheUSSRdoes not wish to cause a fight on this issue.2. IfU Thantstays in office 

                        in the higher echelons of the United Nations.3. 

                        Rolz-Bennett would be a likely candidate to replace him. IfRolz-Bennettis promoted, 

to the Committee. I have noted that the guidelines  may be

be very bad indeed, and retraced some of the difficulties thatTaylorhas had in the past, . I said that

Special Assistant (Rostow)1Washington,.SUBJECTNotes on 303 forPFIAB,

Determining Whether He Will Run for ReelectionACQ(15 and 19 April 1966)1. United Nations Secretary GeneralU

development, engineering and early test flights of a  with exactly

retain our options on the manner and extent of our participation.7. Mr.  has worked withJohn Bross, Larry Houston,

Administration (Crockett)1Washington,.Dear Bill:With reference to your letter of 8 September 1966 to ,2we have

supports an affirmative answer.9. I would suggest the following review procedure for :a. Request and assemble program data using theCCPSformat. This should be a relatively simple process in

immediate action, request theCIA

    source text not declassified] next budget submission.d. If at any point theCIA

19PLACE &amp; DATE ACQ.20 April 1965REFIN 487161. In privateU Thantis very critical

change has, however, come fromBOB.2. 3. Should State seek review of DOD clandestine activities, rather than

President on Chances for a Successful Negotiation ofUNFinancial ProblemPLACE &amp; DATE ACQ.1 March 1965SOURCE AND APPRAISAL1. United Nations General Assembly PresidentAlex

Agency and in many cases are done without the knowledge of Mr. .2. We could list a large number of gripes by item to prove the foregoing.

    Policy PapersOFFICIALS PRESENTCIA:Mr.HelmsState:Mr.RostowMr. YagerMr. Ford2The meeting was called at the request of Mr.Rostowto discuss National Policy Papers.Mr.Rostowsuggested that the completion of a given

Yager or Ford said that James Critchfield referred toUSIBAgency in the  papers but

worked out satisfactorily. Mr.Helmsagreed. said thatCIAhad agreed on a position which either

                        be a key factor. De

coordinated in Saigon, but might merit consideration ifCIAsupport to thePRUis ruled out.7. CostsThePRUprogram is budgeted at 

them from the Thai and then replacing the Thai losses.  Check

its para-military arm, thePARU. So far as I can ascertain, the decisions on theCIArole with theBPPare

    than 1 line of source text not declassified].The program fund levels for these activities are:  in Fiscal Year 1969, of which

equipment, and 

    declassified]. A message for your clearance is at Tab A,2.State's purpose in this clandestine approach is to reinforce

thanks the very comprehensive account of the entire event when Gen Chouof the NSG had given 

capability (i.e. we have air), air control of log. support, .RN: I wonder if we are doing enough with

export. HAK: (toLynn) [Where does that come from?]20Richardson: Army Engineering study

     as suggested in

    their charges of U.S. aggression.C. Pyongyang Radio, however, continues to claim that the U.S.

airstrikes against two airfields:I believe discarding the other military options was appropriate. If a

optionsay, . AdmiralJohnsonthought the attacks

against . SecretaryJohnsoninquired about other

in striking .AdmiralJohnsonraised the

instance, .AdmiralJohnsonthen displayed a

objectives of the 25 plans contained in the Red Book. SecretaryJohnsonremarked that .SecretaryJohnsonthen asked how

following:TheJCSconsidered striking  other

that:TheJCSrecommends: [5

    The amends business was suggested by Len Unger to Foreign MinisterThanat. [3

    .

previously considered. 

                        manager.Marcossaid that he might have need of 

                        advantage .

                        President .Brownwas a good deal more

text not declassified]. We also know from a sensitive 

termination.9. 10. Since 1950, over $132,000,000 has been spent in building up a

    PresidentACQJuly 1969SOURCE1. In early July 1969 a Rumanian official stationed abroad commented

    (Comment: The Rumanian official stressed that

involve some  people and

Administration. In practice, and as requested by the 303 Committee, .While no provision was made for their existence after 30 June 1969, the

have come largely fromCIA, .1.Radio Free Europe (RFE)Radio Free Europe has been in operation since 1949, and currently

Germany on a year-to-year, automatically renewable license.FE, Inc., employs  people

budget,  was

does not expire until 30 July 1971.The Radio Liberty Committee, Inc., currently employs  people and has anFY1969 budget of $12,953,000, of which  is forRL.Replying to a State Department request for an evaluation of Radio Liberty

     byCIA. There is no reason to believe that

termination would require at least 12 months and approximately  for the two

Europe is $20,900,000 ;

    Southern flank ofNATO.5. U.S. 

    

than to urge that Turkey gradually assume the military  missions which

preparations are not merely bluff.4. (Comment: There is no doubt that the military is

tampered with.)5. (Comment: PresidentSunaydelivered his 19 May holiday message on Turkish

including communication links for the 6th Fleet and Turkey,  and logistics bases

the willingness of Congress to appropriate either for new  facilities or

andunless uniqueto communications  facilities

would alter the strategic balance.PackardBriefing4GetWheelers talking points on

launchings.2. 3. 4. Freezing the number and verifiable characteristics ofSAMsystems would increase our confidence

about 250ICBMlaunchers and 100SLBMlaunchers per year, .Therefore, theU.S. may wish to propose,

had been carefully planned for about two years prior to initiation.  This is an example of

    AllisonCIAR. Jack SmithOEPHaakon LindjordAECAllen LabowitzUSIAFrank ShakespeareACDAGerard SmithSpurgeon Keeny, Jr.OSTDonald SteiningerOEPHaakon LindjordNSCStaffMorton HalperinWilliam HylandWinston LordLaurence LynnHelmut SonnenfeldtSUMMARY OF RESULTSIt was confirmed that a directive was going out for the Steering Group to

observation.There followed an extensive discussion, primarily involving ,J. Smith,HylandandAllison, with regard to very sensitive intelligence

    not declassified].It is clear that it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, for

    Assistant to the PresidentPhilip J. Farley(ACDA) (CIA)Laurence Lynn(NSC)Helmut Sonnenfeldt(NSC)William Watts(NSC)RNI would like to begin the briefings in

mission covers a narrow swath.We have received fragmentary and ambiguous information.The information we gather and our capabilities have developed

